Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary
Drying up of Tamulidoba Beel, a major wetland in Assam’s Pobitora wildlife sanctuary brings to the fore an urgent need for habitat management.
About Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary
Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary, located in the eastern region of Guwahati,
, was established in 1998 and covers an area of 48.81 square kilometres.
The Sanctuary consists of the
Rajamayong Reserve Forest and Pobitora Reserve Forest.
Flora:
72% of Pobitora consists of the wet
savannah
of Arundo donax, Erianthus ravennae, Phragmites karka, Imperata cylindrica, and Saccharum spp.
Water hyacinth (Eichornia crassipes) is a major problem, especially to waterfowl, as it forms thick mats on the water surface.
Fauna:
Pobitora is mainly famous for its great
Indian One-horned rhinoceros
Besides rhinoceros, the other animals are leopard, wild boar, barking deer, wild buffalo etc.
It is also home to more than 2000 migratory birds and various reptiles.
History:
Pobitora became a reserved wooded area in the year of 1971 with the approval of the Government of Assam.
The Government of India included Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary with the association of a rhino breeding program named
"Indian Rhino Vision 2020"
Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary is known for holding the
highest density of Greater One Horned Rhinoceros
in the country.
Tamulidoba Beel is a wetland in Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary, near Morigaon, that's a popular spot for birdwatchers and photographers, especially during winter when it becomes a hub for migratory birds.
It has been an ideal habitat for rhinos and buffaloes in particular, besides hosting wide-ranging water birds.
Click to View More
Source :
Major Water Body Dries up In Assam’s Wildlife Sanctuary, Experts Point Need For Habitat Management
Environment & Ecology
**********Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis resurges worldwide as Trump’s funding cuts disrupt global treatment programs, threatening progress and increasing infection rates.
About Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by bacteria that most often affects the
lungs
. It spreads through the air when people with TB cough, sneeze or spit.
About a quarter of the global population is estimated to have been infected with TB bacteria. About
5–10% of people
infected, eventually get symptoms and develop TB disease.
Transmission
: Those who are infected but free of disease cannot transmit it. TB disease is usually
treated with antibiotics
and can be fatal without treatment.
Symptoms
: Active TB symptoms include a persistent cough lasting over two weeks, chest pain, coughing up blood or sputum, fatigue, weakness, loss of appetite, weight loss, chills, fever and night sweats.
Treatment:
TB is
preventable and curable
. TB is treated with a standard 6-month course of
4 antimicrobial drugs
that are provided with information, supervision and support to the patient by a health worker or trained volunteer.
Multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB)
Drug resistance emerges when TB medicines are used inappropriately, through incorrect prescription by health care providers, poor quality drugs, or patients stopping treatment prematurely.
MDR-TB is a form of TB caused by bacteria that
do not respond to isoniazid and rifampicin
, the two most effective first-line TB drugs. MDR-TB is treatable and curable by using other drugs, which tend to be more expensive and toxic.
Click to View More
Source :
Tuberculosis Resurgent as Trump Funding Cut Disrupts Treatment Globally
Science & Tech
**********Uniyala Keralensis
Researchers have named the new shrub species, which is endemic to southwest India, Uniyala keralensis (family Asteraceae) after the State of Kerala.
About Uniyala Keralensis
Uniyala keralensis is a “small to large shrub,” growing up to one to three metres in height and sporting attractive light purple florets, according to the paper.
s has, among other things,
larger leaves
, fairly long petioles - the slender stalk that joins the leaf to the stem - and fewer lateral veins on the leaves.
Flowering and fruiting occurs during
August to April.
It is found in open areas of the western mountain slopes of the
Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve (ABR)
at elevations ranging between 700 to 1,400 metres.
The present population consists of nearly 5,000 plants of various ages in four subpopulations occupying an area of 250 square kilometres.
Following the IUCN Red List Criteria (IUCN 2024), Uniyala keralensis is assessed as
Data Deficient (DD).
Click to View More
Source :
Plant species first collected 27 years ago identified as new species of the genus Uniyala
Environment & Ecology
**********CAR T-cell Therapy
The clinical trial results of India’s first CAR T-cell therapy, published in The Lancet, show that it worked for nearly 73 percent of patients.
About CAR T-cell Therapy
CAR T-cell therapy, or chimeric antigen
receptor T-cell therapy
, trains the body’s own immune cells to
identify and destroy cancer cells
This treatment is designed for specific types of
blood cancer
and is given to patients whose cancer has either relapsed or not responded to first-line treatment.
How does the therapy work?
For any CAR T-cell therapy, a patient’s immune T-cells are collected by filtering their blood.
These cells are then engineered in a lab to add receptors that can bind with cancer cells. These cells are then multiplied and infused in the patient.
Usually, the cancer cells are adept at evading the unmodified T cells.
The treatment developed in India is meant for patients with two types of blood cancers that affect the B cells — acute lymphoblastic leukemia and large B cell lymphomas.
Side Effects of CAR T Therapy
A serious immune overreaction causing hyperinflammation and organ damage, seen in 12% of participants, resulting in at least one death.
Low red blood cell count, reported in 61% of participants, causing fatigue and weakness.
Thrombocytopenia:
Low platelet count, increasing the risk of bleeding, reported in 65% of patients.
Neutropenia:
Low neutrophil count, seen in 96% of participants, raising the risk of infections.
Click to View More
Source :
Novel cancer therapy works for 73 per cent Indian patients in clinical trials: Why the Lancet report is significant
Science & Tech
**********Assam Rifles
Union Home Minister has recently announced the relocation of Assam Rifles battalions to Mizoram.
About Assam Rifles
Assam Rifles is one of the six
Central Armed Police Forces
(CAPFs) that come under the MHA’s administrative control.
It conducts counterinsurgency operations in north-eastern India and other areas where deemed necessary.
Its
operational control is with the Indian Army
, with an officer of the rank of Lieutenant General commanding the force.
The headquarters of the Director-General of Assam Rifles (DGAR) is in
Shillong
unlike other Central paramilitary forces, all of which have their headquarters in New Delhi.
Assam Rifles History
Assam Rifles has its origins in 1835 as a militia called the ‘
Cachar Levy
’ to protect British tea estates and their settlements against tribal raids.
It later became the ‘
Frontier Force
’ conducting punitive expeditions across the borders of Assam.
In 1870, the existing elements were merged into three Assam Military Police Battalions, sending over 3,000 men as part of the British Army to Europe and West Asia.
In 1917, the name was changed to Assam Rifles.
The force has evolved post-Independence, from combat roles during the Sino-India War 1962 to being a part of the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) in Sri Lanka in 1987, besides performing peacekeeping roles in north-eastern India. From 17 battalions in 1960 it has grown to 46 battalions today.
Click to View More
Source :
Relocation of Assam Rifles from Aizawl marks a new era of urban development: Amit Shah
Science & Tech
**********What is PM-YUVA 3.0?
The Ministry of Education, Department of Higher Education recently launched PM-YUVA 3.0 -Prime Minister's Scheme for Mentoring Young Authors.
About PM-YUVA 3.0:
(PM-YUVA 3.0) aims to
train young and budding authors below 30 years
of age to promote reading, writing, and book culture in the country.
The scheme will help to develop a stream of writers who can write on various facets of India, encompassing the past, present, and future.
PM-YUVA 3.0 intends to bring to the fore the perspectives of the young generation of writers
on the following themes:
Contribution of Indian Diaspora in Nation Building
;
Indian Knowledge System
; and
Makers of Modern India
(1950-2025).
Besides, the scheme will also provide a window for the aspiring youth to articulate themselves and present a comprehensive outlook of the contribution of Indians across fields in ancient and present times.
National Book Trust (NBT),
under the Ministry of Education
as the
Implementing Agency,
will ensure
phase-wise execution
of the scheme under well-defined stages of mentorship.
Features:
The contestants will be asked to submit a
book proposal of 10,000 words.
This includes a synopsis of 2000-3000 words, a chapter plan, two-three sample chapters of 7000-8000 words, a bibliography, and references.
total of 50 authors will be selected.
The selection will be made by a committee to be constituted by NBT.
Applicants who had qualified for the PM-YUVA Scheme 1.0 and PM-YUVA Scheme 2.0 are not eligible for the PM-YUVA 3.0 scheme.
selected young authors will engage with esteemed writers
participate in literary festivals
, and contribute to a diverse body of work that reflects India's rich heritage and contemporary progress.
books prepared under this schem
e will be
published by National Book Trust, India,
translated into other Indian languages
, fostering cultural and literary exchange while promoting '
Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat
'.
consolidated scholarship of Rs. 50,000 per month for a period of six months
(50,000 x 6 = Rs. 3 Lakh)
per author
will be paid under the Mentorship Scheme.
royalty of 10% will be payable
to the authors
on successful publications
of their books at the end of the Mentorship Program.
They will also be given a
platform to promote their books
and also to propagate the reading and writing culture on a national scale.
Click to View More
Source :
Ministry Of Education Launches PM Scheme For Mentoring Young Authors
Polity & Governance
**********North East Center for Technology Application and Reach (NECTAR)
The Union Minister of Science and Technology recently laid the foundation stone for the North East Center for Technology Application and Reach (NECTAR) permanent campus at Mawdiangdiang, Shillong.
About North East Center for Technology Application and Reach (NECTAR):
It is an
autonomous society
, set up under the
Department of Science & Technology,
Government of India, with its
headquarters at Shillong, Meghalaya.
It was established in 2012 by merging two missions, viz., the National Mission for Bamboo Application (NMBA) and the Mission for Geospatial Applications (MGA).
The Centre will look at harnessing and
leveraging niche frontier technologies
available with central scientific departments and institutions.
In order to
assist the northeastern region,
NECTAR will be
ensuring applications of appropriate technologies for development
in the areas of biodiversity concerns, watershed management, telemedicine, horticulture, infrastructure planning & development, planning and monitoring, and tele-schooling
using cutting-edge MESHNET solutions, employment generation,
through
utilization of local products/
resources and
associated skill development.
The Centre is sought to be
designed in terms of:
The Role of
Solution Designer
Being a Partnership Institution
Technology Assistance to the State Government
in North Eastern Region
Assistance to State Government in Technology-Assisted Decision Support Systems Focus on Technology Reach Function
Differentiated Approach from Technology Development Organizations
At present,
NECTAR is
functioning from the Survey of India Campus, Shillong,
having branch offices at Delhi and Agartala.
Click to View More
Source :
Union min laids foundation for NECTAR in Shillong
**********What is Foreign Exchange Reserve?
In the sharpest jump in over two years, the country’s foreign exchange reserves increased by $15.267 billion to $653.966 billion recently.
About Foreign Exchange Reserve:
Foreign Exchange Reserves (also called
Forex Reserves
) are
foreign currency assets held by the central banks
of countries.
These assets
include foreign marketable securities, gold
special drawing rights
(SDRs), and
reserve position in the IMF.
These are
denominated and expressed in the US dollar,
which is the international numeraire for the purpose.
China
largest foreign exchange reserve holder
in the world.
RBI is the custodian
of the foreign exchange reserves in India.
India’s foreign exchange reserves comprise of;
Foreign currency assets (FCAs):
These are maintained in currencies like the US dollar, euro, pound sterling, Australian dollar, and Japanese yen.
Gold
Special Drawing Rights):
This is the reserve currency with the IMF.
RTP
Reserve Tranche Position):
This is the reserve capital with the IMF.
biggest contributor
to India’s Forex reserves
is foreign currency assets, followed by gold.
Purpose:
They ensure that the
country has sufficient liquidity
to carry out
foreign exchange transactions or cope with
balance of payments deficit.
A central bank can use its foreign exchange reserves (foreign currencies) to
intervene in Forex markets
influence its currency’s exchange rate.
If the value of the Rupee decreases
due to an increase in the demand for the foreign currency, then
RBI sells the dollar
in the Indian money market so that depreciation of the Indian currency can be checked.
A country with a good stock of forex has a
good image
at the international level because the trading
countries can be sure about their payments.
Click to View More
Source :
Forex kitty jumps sharpest in two years
Economy
**********Key Facts about Raisina Dialogue
The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Foreign Ministers of at least 18 countries, top executives of several global firms and foreign policy experts will converge in the national capital for the annual Raisina Dialogue.
About Raisina Dialogue:
It is
India’s flagship conference on geopolitics and geo-economics
, committed to addressing the most challenging issues facing the international community.
It is modeled on the lines of the Munich Security Conference and Singapore’s Shangri-La Dialogue.
held annually since 2016 in New Delhi.
It is structured as a multi-stakeholder, cross-sectoral discussion, involving
heads of State, Cabinet Ministers,
and local government officials, who are joined by thought
leaders from the private sector, media,
and academia.
The conference is
hosted by the Observer Research Foundation (ORF)
partnership with the Ministry of External Affairs,
Government of India.
This effort is supported by a number of institutions, organisations, and individuals, who are committed to the mission of the conference.
theme of Raisina Dialogue 2025
Kalachakra: People. Peace. Planet.
Click to View More
Source :
New Zealand PM, several foreign ministers to participate in Raisina Dialogue
International Relations
**********What is Melioidosis?
A recent study has revealed that melioidosis disease in Odisha has clear seasonality, with infections peaking during and after the monsoon season.
About Melioidosis:
It is a
bacterial
infectious disease caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei.
lives in surface water
(streams, rivers, lakes)
and soil,
mostly in tropical or subtropical areas.
endemic in Southeast Asia, northern Australia
, much of the
Indian subcontinent,
southern China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan.
It is also sometimes called
Whitmore’s disease.
It has a
high Case Fatality Rate
(CFR) ranging from
16% to 50%
in known endemic regions.
Transmission
Both humans and animals can get melioidosis, but
people can’t get it from animals.
It spreads through
direct contact with soil, air, or water contaminated by the bacteria.
Its cases may
increase after hurricanes,
heavy rain, and other
severe weather events
because the bacteria rises to the surface of the soil.
In areas where it’s more commonly found, melioidosis
usually affects adults 40 to 60 years old
with certain underlying conditions. Children under 15 rarely get melioidosis.
Symptoms
can be present with localised infection
(such as cutaneous abscess), pneumonia, meningoencephalitis, sepsis, or chronic suppurative infection.
Depending on the infection, common symptoms include f
ever, headache, localised pain
or swelling,
ulceration, chest pain
, cough, shortness of breath,
haemoptysis
, and swelling of lymph nodes.
Treatment:
It can be treated with
antibiotics
Long-term treatment may be necessary for some chronic infection cases.
Click to View More
Source :
Environmental mapping reveals melioidosis in Odisha peak during monsoon
Science & Tech
**********The International Criminal Court and Its Reach
Why in the News?
Former Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte was flown to the Netherlands on March 12 to face charges of crimes against humanity before the International Criminal Court (ICC).
What’s in Today’s Article?
About ICC (Background, Jurisdiction, etc.)
Philippines Case (Philippines’ Response, Challenges, Implications, Way Ahead, etc.)
Background:
Former Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte has been flown to the Netherlands to face charges of crimes against humanity before the
His indictment marks a significant moment for the ICC, which has often struggled to enforce its warrants.
The court accuses Duterte of being "individually responsible" for mass killings carried out during his aggressive "war on drugs" between 2011 and 2019, a campaign that led to the deaths of approximately 30,000 people.
The case is particularly notable because Duterte withdrew the Philippines from the ICC’s jurisdiction in 2019.
However, ICC prosecutors argue that crimes committed before the withdrawal still fall under the court’s authority.
This move has sparked debates on the ICC’s power and reach in prosecuting global leaders.
Understanding the ICC’s Jurisdiction:
The ICC was established under the
Rome Statute of 1998
and serves as a permanent court to prosecute individuals responsible for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.
It has
125 signatory states
, all of which are obligated to cooperate with its mandates, including arresting and extraditing individuals facing warrants.
However, compliance is inconsistent, as seen in the case of
Vladimir Putin and Benjamin Netanyahu
, whose ICC arrest warrants remain unenforced.
While the ICC does not have its own enforcement body, it relies on national governments and
Interpol
to execute arrest warrants.
If a state refuses to comply, the ICC can refer the case to the
United Nations Security Council (UNSC)
, which can impose further obligations on UN member states.
Challenges in Enforcing ICC Warrants:
Lack of Enforcement Power
: The ICC relies on member states to execute its arrest warrants, making compliance voluntary.
Political Resistance
: Countries often refuse to cooperate if they view ICC actions as politically motivated.
Geopolitical Interference
: Major powers like the
United States, Russia, and China
have criticized the ICC’s actions, fearing it could be used for political leverage.
Complementarity Principle
: The ICC can only intervene if national courts are
unwilling or unable
to prosecute crimes. The Philippines initially claimed its judicial system was handling the issue, but the ICC found insufficient evidence of domestic prosecution efforts.
Implications for the ICC and International Justice:
Duterte’s arrest is considered a
rare success
for the ICC, which has struggled with enforcing its mandates against powerful leaders.
However, it also exposes the court’s
vulnerabilities
, such as reliance on national governments and political influences.
The ICC has faced criticism for alleged
Western bias
, as many of its cases have targeted
leaders from developing countries
Additionally, its actions sometimes intersect with global geopolitics, leading to accusations that the court is being used as a
political tool
For example, China, which has territorial disputes with the Philippines, has condemned the ICC’s handling of the case.
Despite these challenges, the case against Duterte
sets a precedent
—showing that leaders accused of severe human rights violations can still be held accountable, even if they attempt to shield themselves by withdrawing from the ICC’s jurisdiction.
Way Ahead:
Duterte now faces a
pre-trial hearing
, where the ICC will determine if there is enough evidence to proceed to trial. During this phase:
Prosecutor’s Office
will present its case.
Duterte’s defense team may argue for
dismissal or interim release
If the court decides to proceed, a
full trial
will be scheduled, though it may take years before a final verdict is reached.
Regardless of the outcome, Duterte’s indictment represents a
major step in international justice
, highlighting both the strengths and limitations of the ICC.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  158.6 KB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Linking Aadhaar with Voter ID - Election Commission's High-Level Meeting
Why in News?
The Election Commission of India (EC) is set to meet with officials from the Union Home Ministry, Law Ministry, and the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)
to discuss linking Aadhaar numbers with
Electors Photo Identity Card (
EPIC
)/ voter ID cards.
This comes in light of
electoral roll irregularities
flagged by the Opposition.
What’s in Today’s Article?
What is the Electors Photo Identity Card (EPIC)?
Background of Aadhaar-Voter ID Linking
Purpose of Aadhaar-Voter ID Linking
Opposition’s Concerns and EC’s Response
Government and EC Stand
Conclusion
About:
Provided to all registered voters as an identification document, however, it does not confer voting rights unless the voter's name is listed in the electoral roll.
Issuance of EPIC:
Introduced in
1993
and are distributed by state governments, the issuance of EPIC is governed by the
Registration of Electors Rules, 1960
EPIC number:
Each EPIC number is
a unique 10-digit alphanumeric code
composed of:
alphabetic characters
7
-digit numeric sequence.
It serves as a unique identifier linking a voter to their photo, constituency, and polling station.
It designed to
prevent voter impersonation and electoral fraud
and is generated via
ERONET
(since 2017), which is a web-based platform for automating the electoral roll process in multiple languages and scripts.
Issues with EPIC numbers:
ECI admitted that
duplicate
EPIC numbers occurred due to manual data entry and decentralized systems before ERONET, and assured that
ERONET 2.0
would be updated to eliminate duplicate EPIC numbers.
Background of Aadhaar-Voter ID Linking:
2015 Supreme Court (SC) ruling:
Aadhaar linking with the Elector’s Photo Identity Card (
) was halted following a SC order stating Aadhaar was not mandatory for availing government benefits.
2021 amendment:
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 was amended to allow Aadhaar-EPIC linking.
2022 collection begins:
EC started collecting Aadhaar details voluntarily but has not used them for electoral roll revisions.
Purpose of Aadhaar-Voter ID Linking:
Eliminating duplicate voter registrations:
Aadhaar numbers would help detect multiple registrations and clean electoral rolls.
Ensuring electoral roll integrity:
Aimed at preventing electoral fraud and manipulation.
Opposition’s Concerns and Allegations:
Allegations of voter list manipulation:
Trinamool Congress (TMC):
Claims identical EPIC numbers exist in multiple states.
LoP in the Lok Sabha:
Raised concerns about electoral roll discrepancies in Parliament.
EC’s Response:
Acknowledged errors in EPIC numbering.
Assured correction
of duplicate EPICs within three months.
Stated that having
does not necessarily indicate fake voters.
Government and EC Stand:
Voluntary nature of Aadhaar-EPIC linkage:
As per the Law Ministry (2024), Aadhaar submission remains voluntary.
Form 6B provides only two options: submitting Aadhaar or declaring non-availability.
Existing data collection:
As of January 2025, India has
99 crore registered voters
66.23 crore Aadhaar numbers collected as per Supreme Court directives.
Upcoming de-duplication process:
EC to update software to identify and replace duplicate EPIC cards.
New EPICs will be issued in non-election states.
Conclusion:
The EC’s meeting aims to address concerns regarding
electoral integrity through Aadhaar-EPIC linkage.
While the Opposition sees it as a delayed reaction, the EC maintains that the process will
enhance the credibility of electoral rolls
The outcome of the discussions could impact
future electoral processes and reforms
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  821.7 KB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Rationale for Creating India’s Latest Tiger Reserve
Why in news?
Recently, Environment Minister Bhupender Yadav announced that Madhav National Park in Madhya Pradesh has been designated as India’s 58th tiger reserve. With this, Madhya Pradesh now has nine tiger reserves, the highest among all states. In comparison, Maharashtra has six, while Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and Karnataka have five each.
What’s in today’s article?
Rationale Behind Setting Up Tiger Reserves
Key Aspects of Establishing a Tiger Reserve
Significance of Madhav National Park
Decline in Tiger Population
Tigers were once abundant in India, with an estimated 40,000 tigers in the early 20th century. However, due to hunting, poaching, deforestation, and colonial timber exploitation, their numbers declined sharply.
By the 1960s, the population dropped to between 2,000 and 4,000, further worsened by gun licenses, increased forest access, and the fur trade.
Conservation Efforts Begin
Recognizing the crisis, naturalists raised alarms, leading to the Indian Board for Wild Life (IBWL) recommending a ban on wild cat skin exports in 1969.
The same year, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classified the tiger as an endangered species in its Red Data Book and called for a ban on tiger killings.
Launch of Project Tiger (1973)
With tiger numbers plummeting to 1,863, the then PM Indira Gandhi set up an 11-member Task Force to devise a conservation strategy.
In August 1972, the Task Force proposed bringing key tiger habitats under Project Tiger, which was officially launched on April 1, 1973, at Corbett Tiger Reserve.
First Nine Tiger Reserves
Initially, nine tiger reserves were established across different ecosystems:
Corbett (Uttarakhand); Palamau (Jharkhand); Simlipal (Odisha)
Sundarbans (West Bengal); Manas (Assam); Ranthambore (Rajasthan)
Kanha (Madhya Pradesh); Melghat (Maharashtra); Bandipur (Karnataka)
These reserves formed the foundation of India’s tiger conservation movement, ensuring habitat protection and population recovery.
Scientific Management Framework
Project Tiger, later replaced by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) in 2006, introduced a structured approach to managing protected areas.
Every tiger reserve must follow a site-specific management plan, ensuring scientific conservation practices.
Core and Buffer Zones
Tiger reserves are divided into:
Core Zone
– Strictly protected habitat for tigers and wildlife.
– Surrounding area with regulated human activities to support conservation efforts.
Tiger Conservation Plans (TCPs):
The NTCA guidelines ensure:
Protection and habitat management
for a viable population of tigers, prey, and co-predators.
Ecologically compatible land use
to connect tiger reserves and other protected areas.
Corridor creation
to maintain genetic diversity by linking source populations (where tiger numbers grow) to sink habitats (where numbers decline).
Process of Declaring a Tiger Reserve
State Government submits a proposal
to the Centre.
NTCA evaluates and recommends
the proposal.
State Government officially notifies
the area as a tiger reserve.
This structured process ensures the long-term conservation and sustainability of tiger populations in India.
Funding Mechanism for Tiger Reserves
Centre-State Cost Sharing
General States:
60% of the funding is provided by the Central Government, while the remaining 40% is borne by the State Government.
Northeastern & Himalayan States:
The Centre covers 90% of the cost, with States contributing 10%.
Notified as a National Park in 1956 under the MP National Parks Act, 1955 with an initial area of 165.32 sq km.
Now expanded to 355 sq km core area with a buffer zone of 4-6 sq km.
Until 2023, there were no tigers; a male and two females were relocated, leading to a population increase to seven.
Ecological & Strategic Importance
Functions as a key wildlife corridor linking the Ranthambore Tiger Reserve (Rajasthan) and Kuno National Park.
Kuno hosts a captive cheetah population, raising concerns about predator competition for prey (deer population).
Madhya Pradesh leads India in tiger conservation with 785 tigers, yet the Kuno-Madhav division has historically been neglected.
Consolidated wildlife management is now focusing on both tigers and cheetahs in the region.
Future Conservation Plans & Challenges
Proposal to relocate Asiatic lions from Gir (Gujarat) to Kuno, approved by the Supreme Court.
The government, in March 2023, raised concerns about lion-cheetah competition, delaying the relocation.
If lions are introduced, it could bring more national and international conservation funding.
Rationale for Creating India’s Latest Tiger Reserve.pdf
( Size:  538.5 KB  )
Click to View More
Environment & Ecology
**********Billion-Dollar Fund to Support Creators’ Economy
Why in news?
The Central government will invest $1 billion to support India’s creators’ economy. The funds will help creators enhance their skills, upgrade production, and expand into global markets, as announced by Information and Broadcasting Minister Ashwini Vaishnaw.
What’s in today’s article?
India’s $1 Billion Investment in the Creators’ Economy
About Creators’ Economy
creators’ economy refers to a digital-driven ecosystem
where individuals—such as content creators, influencers, bloggers, and independent artists—monetize their skills and creativity through social media platforms, digital content, and online businesses.
Creative Economy is also refereed to as Orange Economy.
This sector includes video creators, podcasters, gamers, educators, and independent writers who generate revenue through brand collaborations, subscriptions, advertisements, and merchandise sales.
Factors Behind India’s Strategic Push Towards the Creators’ Economy
Growing Digital User Base
India has over 800 million internet users, making it one of the largest digital markets in the world.
The widespread use of smartphones and affordable data has fueled content consumption.
Employment & Economic Growth
The sector has the potential to generate self-employment and entrepreneurship opportunities, reducing reliance on traditional job markets.
Soft Power & Global Influence
Indian content creators are gaining international recognition, helping project India’s cultural and linguistic diversity to a global audience.
Tech-Driven Economy
With advancements in AI, AR/VR, and blockchain, new monetization models such as NFTs and decentralized platforms are emerging, making the sector more lucrative.
Diversity of Regional Content
The rise of vernacular content is expanding India’s digital economy beyond English and Hindi, tapping into a vast regional audience.
Challenges Faced
Indian creators face numerous challenges, including inconsistent monetization opportunities, stringent platform algorithms, and limited brand collaborations.
Intellectual property protection remains a concern, with content piracy and lack of legal awareness affecting earnings.
Steps Taken by the Indian Government
– Announced by the government to support skill enhancement, production quality, and global expansion of Indian creators.
Digital India & Start-up Ecosystem
– Policies such as Digital India, Make in India, and Startup India are fostering an environment conducive to digital entrepreneurship.
PLI Schemes for Electronics
– Encouraging local manufacturing of devices such as smartphones, cameras, and laptops that aid content creation.
Regulatory Support & Infrastructure
– Initiatives like 5G rollout and improved broadband penetration to enhance content creation and streaming quality.
Support for Vernacular & Regional Creators
– Promotion of Indian languages on digital platforms to ensure inclusivity and wider audience reach.
AI & Digital Skill Development
– Focus on AI-based content moderation and creator upskilling to ensure ethical and high-quality content.
High-Level Engagement Ahead of WAVES 2025
Ahead of the
World Audio Visual and Entertainment Summit (WAVES) 2025
, a high-level session was hosted by the government to engage the international community.
WAVES 2025 will facilitate
joint ventures, co-productions, and business expansion
in the media and entertainment sector.
Participants highlighted how the intersection of creativity, media, and technology is reshaping the industry and emphasized WAVES 2025 as a key platform for innovation and collaboration.
The Role of WAVES 2025 in the Orange Economy
The government highlighted WAVES 2025’s role in leveraging the media and entertainment industries for economic growth and job creation.
The summit will serve as a bridge for cultural diplomacy, fostering unity and global harmony through creative industries.
Billion-Dollar Fund to Support Creators’ Economy.pdf
( Size:  239.8 KB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********