India wants ‘review & modification’ of Indus Waters Treaty
Why in news?
India has sent a new formal notice to Pakistan seeking the "review and modification" of the Indus Waters Treaty (IWT), following a similar request in January 2023.
This latest notice, issued under
Article XII (3) of the IWT
, is significant as the inclusion of "review" suggests India's intention to potentially revoke and renegotiate the 64-year-old treaty.
Article XII (3) allows for modifications of the treaty through a duly ratified agreement between the two governments.
What’s in today’s article?
India demands modification of IWT
Indus Water Treaty (IWT)
About
The Treaty is a water-distribution treaty between India and Pakistan, brokered by the World Bank.
According to this treaty
, three rivers: Ravi, Sutlej and Beas were given to India
and the other
three: Sindh, Jhelum and Chenab were given to Pakistan
Rights & obligations under this treaty
India is under obligation to let the waters of the western rivers flow, except for certain consumptive use.
The treaty allocates Pakistan approx. 80% of the entire water of the six-river Indus system and reserved for India just remaining 19.48% of the total waters.
India can construct storage facilities on western rivers of up to 3.6-million-acre feet, which it has not done so far.
IWT permits run of the river projects
on the western rivers, subject to specific design and operation criteria.
India is required to provide Pakistan with prior notification, including design information, of any new project.
Dispute redressal mechanism under the Treaty
Article IX of the Treaty is a dispute resolution mechanism -
graded at three levels
to resolve a difference or a dispute related to projects on the Indus waters.
First level
Either party has to inform the other side if they are planning projects on the Indus river with all the information that is required or asked for by the other party.
This process is done at the level of the
Permanent Indus Commission
(PIC), created to implement and manage the goals of the IWT.
If PIC is unable to solve the question in contention, the question becomes difference and goes to second level.
Second level
The second grade is the
World Bank appointing a neutral expert
to resolve the differences.
If a neutral expert cannot resolve the issue, the difference becomes a dispute and goes to third level.
Third level
At this level, the matter goes to a Court of Arbitration (CoA) whose chair is appointed by the World Bank.
About the news
Citing fundamental and unforeseen changes in the circumstances, India has sent a formal notice to Pakistan to seek a review of the IWT.
It has also cited the impact of persistent cross-border terrorism as one of the reasons for demanding the reassessment of the pact.
The notification highlights fundamental and unforeseen changes in circumstances that require a reassessment of obligations under various articles of the treaty.
India had also sent a notice to Pakistan in January 2023 seeking amendment to 1960 treaty.
Reasons behind India’s demand to renegotiate the treaty
India's latest notice to Pakistan on the Indus Waters Treaty (IWT) cites "fundamental and unforeseen changes in circumstances" as reasons for reassessment.
Concerns include changes in population demographics, environmental issues, the need for clean energy development to meet emission targets, and the impact of cross-border terrorism.
The notifications come amid controversy over two Indian hydel power projects in Jammu & Kashmir —
Kishanganga and Ratle
— which Pakistan alleges violate the IWT.
These projects are "run-of-the-river" and generate electricity without obstructing river flow.
Reason behind the notice in January 2023
India's latest notice to Pakistan regarding the IWT follows Islamabad's objections to two Indian hydel projects.
Pakistan initially sought a "Neutral Expert" to address its concerns but later proposed the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) for adjudication.
India objected, citing this as a breach of the treaty’s sequential dispute resolution mechanism, which s
tarts with the Indus Commissioners, then a Neutral Expert, and finally the PCA if needed
The World Bank halted the dual processes in 2016, urging both countries to resolve the issue amicably.
Despite attempts by India, Pakistan did not engage in discussions between 2017 and 2022.
In 2022, the World Bank decided to proceed with both the Neutral Expert and PCA processes
, leading to India’s January 2023 notice, the first in over 60 years
India wants ‘review & modification’ of Indus Waters Treaty.pdf
( Size:  2.7 MB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Simultaneous Polls Roadmap
Why in news?
The Union Cabinet has approved a proposal for simultaneous elections to the Lok Sabha, state Assemblies, and local government bodies, as recommended by the High Level Committee on One Nation, One Election, led by former President Ram Nath Kovind.
As per the govt, implementation will occur in two phases: first, aligning Lok Sabha and Assembly elections, and second, holding local body elections within 100 days of the first phase.
What’s in today’s article?
History of Elections in India
Roadmap for Simultaneous Polls
Era of simultaneous elections
The first general elections of free India held simultaneously to the Lok Sabha and the Legislative Assemblies of the States in 1951.
next three cycles of elections
also witnessed concurrent Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly elections barring a few stray cases like:
Kerala where a mid-term election was held in 1960 on the pre-mature dissolution of the Assembly, and
in Nagaland and Pondicherry where the Assembly was created only after the 1962 general elections.
The last occasion when we had
near-simultaneous elections was in 1967
Beginning of the end of simultaneous elections
The fourth Lok Sabha constituted in 1967 was dissolved prematurely in 1971. This was the beginning of the end of simultaneous elections.
Extension of the term of Lok Sabha during the National Emergency declared in 1975 and the dissolution of Assemblies of some States after the 1977 Lok Sabha election further disturbed the cycle of concurrent elections.
Current status
After the two pre-mature dissolutions of the Lok Sabha in 1998 and 1999,
only four State Assemblies have been going to polls along with the Lok Sabha elections in the last two decades
We now have
at least two rounds of Assembly general elections every year
Steps needed after the approval from the Union Cabinet
The One Nation, One Election project requires two Constitutional Amendment Bills to be passed by Parliament, needing broad agreement across various parties.
To build consensus, the government may refer the bills to a parliamentary committee, which includes opposition members.
Additionally, to include local bodies in simultaneous elections, at least half of the states must ratify the Constitutional amendment.
Although the BJP currently governs in over a dozen states, upcoming Assembly elections in Haryana, Maharashtra, and Jharkhand could impact this distribution.
Changes needed in the Constitution
The transition to a simultaneous election system requires two Constitutional Amendment Bills.
First Amendment Bill
: This bill needs a 'special majority' in both the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, which involves:
At least half of the total membership of both houses must vote in favor.
Two-thirds of members present and voting must approve the amendment.
Second Amendment Bill
: This bill aims to align local body elections with the simultaneous elections. It must satisfy the same conditions as the first bill, plus:
Ratification by at least half of the state legislatures is required.
This is because
local government is under the State List
, giving states the authority to pass laws related to it.
What will happen if these Bills are passed by Parliament?
According to the Kovind Committee's roadmap:
Implementation
The President will issue a notification during the first Lok Sabha sitting after a general election, activating Article 82A from the first Constitution Amendment Bill, which
marks the "appointed date
."
Article 82A — a new article that will be introduced through the first Bill to facilitate the transition to simultaneous elections.
Any state Assemblies elected after this "appointed date" will be dissolved when the Lok Sabha’s term ends.
Some state Assemblies will dissolve before their five-year term ends to align with the Lok Sabha elections.
Mid-Term Elections
If a state Assembly or Lok Sabha is dissolved early, a mid-term election will occur.
The newly elected body will serve only until the next scheduled simultaneous elections. This interim period is called the "unexpired term."
Election Commission Role
If the ECI determines that a state Assembly election cannot be held simultaneously, it can recommend a delay.
However, future elections will still be conducted simultaneously.
Single Electoral Roll
The ECI will create a unified electoral roll for all elections, including Lok Sabha, state Assemblies, municipalities, and panchayats, in collaboration with State Election Commissions.
This amendment also needs ratification by at least half of the states.
Simultaneous Polls Roadmap.pdf
( Size:  2.6 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********India could generate up to 9.2 lakh TWH from its Blue Renewable Energy Sources
Why in the News?
Researchers at the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) in Hyderabad have developed the
Integrated Ocean Energy Atlas
This atlas identifies potential sites along India’s coastline that can generate energy from
blue renewable sources
such as tidal waves and currents.
What’s in Today’s Article?
About INCOIS (Objective, Activities, etc.)
Blue Renewable Energy Sources (Meaning, Types, etc.)
News Summary
About INCOIS:
Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) is an autonomous organization, established in 1999, under the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
It is a unit of the Earth System Science Organization (ESSO).
: To provide ocean data, information and advisory services to society, industry, the government and the scientific community.
Activities of INCOIS Include
Provides round-the-clock monitoring and warning services for the coastal population on tsunamis, storm surges, high waves, etc.
Provides daily advisories to fisher folk to help them easily locate areas of abundant fish in the ocean while saving on both fuel and time used to search for the same.
Short term (3-7 days) Ocean State Forecasts (waves, currents, sea surface temperature, etc.) are issued daily.
Deploys and maintains a suite of Ocean Observing Systems in the Indian Ocean to collect data on various oceanic parameters to understand the processes in the ocean and to predict their changes.
Blue Renewable Energy Sources:
Blue Renewable Energy Sources refer to sustainable energy derived from the ocean's natural forces, including tidal waves, ocean currents, and thermal gradients.
These sources harness the immense power of the sea to generate electricity without emitting greenhouse gases, making them a clean and eco-friendly alternative to fossil fuels.
Key types of blue renewable energy include:
Tidal Energy
: Generated from the rise and fall of tides, tidal energy uses turbines placed in tidal streams or barrages to produce electricity.
Wave Energy
: Captures energy from surface waves using floating devices or underwater systems, converting the kinetic motion of waves into power.
Ocean Current Energy
: Utilizes the continuous flow of ocean currents to turn underwater turbines, generating consistent and predictable electricity.
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC)
: Exploits the temperature difference between warm surface water and cold deep water to generate power, often using a heat engine.
Blue renewable energy holds significant potential for sustainable power generation, particularly for coastal and island nations, providing a reliable and environmentally friendly energy solution.
India could generate up to 9.2 lakh TWH from its Blue Renewable Energy Sources - Summary
Researchers at the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) have developed the Integrated Ocean Energy Atlas.
This first-of-its-kind atlas maps potential sites along India’s coastline for generating blue renewable energy from sources like tidal waves, currents, and salinity gradients.
Covering India’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of up to 220 km from the coast, the atlas estimates that
the EEZ could generate about 9.2 lakh terawatt hours (TWh) of energy
atlas incorporates data from the past 20-30 years, assessing energy potential with daily, monthly, and annual estimates, aiding industries, policymakers, and researchers in planning and decision-making for harnessing blue energy
It also considers fishing zones, shipping lines, cyclone-prone areas, and eco-sensitive regions to guide infrastructure planning.
The atlas highlights key areas suitable for different energy sources, like tidal waves in Gujarat and West Bengal, and salinity gradients in Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal.
The govt of India is encouraging expanding this assessment to other countries in the Indian Ocean to gain a comprehensive regional understanding.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  836.9 KB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********4 Key Space Projects Receive the Go-Ahead from Cabinet
Why in News?
The Union Cabinet approves four important space endeavours to be launched by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) in the near future.
In total, the Cabinet cleared funds of more than ₹22,750 crore for the developmental costs of these four programmes, which are in line with the
Vision 2047
mapped by the space agency.
What’s in Today’s Article?
What are the 4 Space Projects Approved by the Cabinet?
About the Chandrayaan-4 Mission
About the Venus Orbiter Mission (VOM)
About the Bharatiya Antariksh Station (BAS)
About the Next Generation Launch Vehicle (NGLV)
- the 4th iteration of India’s lunar mission;
The development of
The building of the
first unit
of India’s indigenous space station, dubbed
Bharatiya Anatriksh Station
(BAS), by extending the scope of Gaganyaan programme; and
The development of the
About the Chandrayaan-4 Mission:
Budget allocated and launch date:
4th mission
to the Moon, for which a budget of
₹2,104.06
crore was cleared,
is slated for launch in 2027
The approved cost for the mission includes -
Spacecraft development and realisation,
Two launches of Launch Vehicle Mark-3 (LVM-3),
External deep space network support, and
Conducting special tests for design validation.
Objectives:
will be a remote mission
, aiming to
bring rock samples
from the lunar surface back to Earth after a soft landing.
It will build on the success of
Chandrayaan-3
, with which
India became the first country to land a probe on the lunar south pole.
Significance:
It will expand on the technology developed in Chandrayaan-3
by adding elements like lunar docking, precision landing, sample collection and a safe journey back to Earth.
This will make India even more self-reliant
in space technologies, boosting innovation and supporting academia.
This mission will
achieve the foundational technologies capabilities
eventually for an
Indian landing on the Moon
(planned by year 2040) and return safely back to Earth.
About the Venus Orbiter Mission (VOM):
₹1,236
VOM mission has set a target of March
2028
. This will be
India’s 2nd mission to a planet
, after the
Mars
Orbiter Mission in
2014
India’s first scientific mission to Venus involves
sending an orbital spacecraft
to study the planet closest to Earth.
It aims to enable scientists to better understand
the Venusian atmosphere, and geology and generate data that gives information into the planet’s thick atmosphere.
Venus is thought to have developed under Earth-like conditions, but a runaway greenhouse effect caused the planet to deviate, rendering it inhospitable for life.
It offers a unique opportunity to
understand how planetary environments can evolve very differently
About the Bharatiya Antariksh Station (BAS):
most ambitious
space project and the
Gaganyaan follow-on
mission, the project saw a net additional funding of ₹11,170 crore.
The first module of the project (dubbed BAS-1) targets a launch in 2028 and the target to complete the entire project is for
2035
BAS aims to
establish an Indian space station that will orbit 400 km above the Earth’s surface
. It will allow astronauts to stay in orbit for 15-20 days.
The massive 52-tonne machine will serve as
a research platform
for Indian astronauts and scientists
to conduct experiments in microgravity, astronomy, and Earth observation.
About the Next Generation Launch Vehicle (NGLV):
In total, ₹8,240 crore was approved for NGLV, which includes development costs, three developmental flights, essential facility establishment, programme management and launch campaign.
It will take 96 months - with the first launch taking place in 84 months.
Objective:
It will be a
new launch vehicle that is capable of high payload
, and will be cost-effective, reusable, and has the potential to be commercially viable.
This launch vehicle is
one of the requirements for setting up of BAS.
NGLV will have
times the present payload
capability
with 1.5 times the cost compared to LVM-3.
It will also have
reusability
resulting in
low-cost access to space
modular green propulsion systems.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  1.2 MB  )
Click to View More
Science & Tech
**********