Saint Narahari Tirtha
In a remarkable discovery, a member of the Team of Research on Culture and Heritage (TORCH) has hit upon a three-foot idol of the 13th Century saint, Narahari Tīrtha recently.
About Saint Narahari Tirtha:
Narahari Tirtha (c. 13th century) was a prominent
Dvaita Vedanta philosopher
, scholar, and saint in the Madhva tradition.
He was a
disciple of Madhvacharya
, the
founder of Dvaita philosophy,
and played a
key role in spreading the doctrine in eastern India,
particularly in the
Kalinga region
(modern Odisha and Andhra Pradesh).
Believed to have hailed from Chikakolu town (present Srikakulam), Tirtha’s
ancestors were aristocrats in the Gajapati empire
in what is now the Odisha state.
Available epigraphical evidence suggests that
kings of Eastern Ganga dynasty were assisted by the saint
for three decades.
ensured that the king followed Sanatana Dharma
and took care of its adherents by
formulating a proper executive system to oversee the temple
administration
His contributions on this front are well documented in
inscriptions
available
Simhachalam and Srikurmam (Srikakulam) temples.
Some honorific prefixes being used along with the name of this saint are: ‘Loka Suraksḥaṇa Ati Nipuṇaḥ’, ‘Yo Avati Kalinga Bhu Sambhavān’.
As saint Ramanuja had introduced Vaiṣṇavism in the region, it was
Narahari Tīrtha’s
prolonged presence
resulted in
Acharya’s
Vaiṣhṇavism getting a firm following
in this region, but in a completely non-interfering and secular manner.
Shri Narahari
wrote fifteen books,
but only two of his works,
Gita Bhasya and Bhavaprakasika
are existing today.
He was the
first one to have composed Devaranamas in Kannada.
instrumental in propagating two more art forms:
Yakṣagana Bayalaṭa
which is a form of dance-drama famous in and around coastal Karnataka; and the
classical dance
form that evolved in Andhra Pradesh as the famous
Kuchipudi
The saint, upon his passing away, was consecrated near the rock adjacent to
Chakratirtha at Hampi
on the banks of Tungabhadra.
contributions are linked to the temple traditions of Puri Jagannath,
strengthening the Madhva influence in Odisha.
Click to View More
Source :
Saint Narahari Tirtha statue discovered in Simhachalam Temple
History & Culture
**********Key Facts about Europa
The icy crust on Jupiter’s moon Europa is much thicker than scientists had thought, which could quash the hope of finding the ingredients for life in the salty oceans beneath its surface.
About Europa:
It is the
smallest and second nearest of the four large moons (Galilean satellites)
discovered
around Jupiter by
the Italian astronomer
Galileo
in 1610.
a rocky object covered with
an extremely
smooth
, elaborately patterned
surface of ice.
It has a diameter of 3,130 km, which makes it a
little smaller than Earth’s Moon.
It may be one of the
most promising places
in our solar system to find present-day environments suitable
for some form of life beyond Earth.
Scientists believe a
saltwater ocean
lies beneath its icy shell, holding twice as much water as Earth's global ocean.
It also may have the chemical elements that are key ingredients to life.
Europa was first observed at close range in 1979 by the Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft and then by the Galileo orbiter beginning in the mid-1990s.
NASA launched Europa Clipper on Oct. 14, 2024,
to determine whether there are places below Europa's surface that could support life.
Click to View More
Source :
Hunt for life on Jupiter’s moon hits an ice block
Science & Tech
**********Polavaram Project
The Telangana government has decided to rope in experts from the Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad (IIT-H), to study the impact of the construction of the Polavaram project on the Godavari River.
About Polavaram Project:
It is a
multi-purpose irrigation project
built on the
in West Godavari district and East Godavari district in
Andhra Pradesh.
It involves the
construction of a dam
to address water scarcity, boost agricultural productivity, and generate power.
The span of the dam is about 1.2 km, having a pier height of 54 m and a total of 48 radial gates (16m x 20m).
Designed
to withstand massive floods
that could occur once in 1000 years, the
Polavaram Spillway
set to have the highest discharge capacity in the world.
At 50 lakh cusecs, it is set to surpass even the 3 Gorges Dam of China, one of the largest dams in the world.
It has been
accorded national project status
by the central government.
Objectives
It is intended for development of a gross
irrigation potential
of 4,36,825 ha.
The project also envisages the generation of
960 MW of hydropower,
drinking water supply
to a population of 28.50 lakh in 611 villages, and
diversion of 80 TMC of water to the Krishna River basin.
The dam will
help manage floodwaters from the Godavari River
, reducing risks to nearby communities.
Click to View More
Source :
T’gana to rope in IIT-H experts to study impact of Polavaram project on Godavari
Geography
**********Key Facts about Cowpea
ISRO recently said the cowpea seeds it had sent to space onboard the PSLV-C60 POEM-4 platform have germinated under microgravity conditions within four days of the launch of the mission.
About Cowpea:
Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) is an annual plant within the pea family (Fabaceae).
It is a
leguminous crop
having
long trailing vines
producing seeds of black, white, or red colour used widely in various food preparations.
originated
and was domesticated
in Southern Africa
and was later moved to East and West Africa and Asia.
It is also known as a
black-eyed pea, southern pea,
Cowpeas are
typically climbing
or trailing vines that bear
compound leaves
with three leaflets.
The
grains contain 25% protein
and several
vitamins and minerals.
plant tolerates drought,
performs well in a wide variety of soils, and, being a legume
replenishes low-fertility soils when the roots are left to decay.
Well-drained loam or slightly heavy soil is best suited.
In colder climates
somewhat
sandy soil is preferred
as crops mature earlier in them.
It is grown mainly by
small-scale farmers in developing regions
where it is
often cultivated with other crops as it tolerates shade.
It also grows and covers the ground quickly, preventing erosion.
The world's
largest production and consumption
of cowpea is in
, which accounts for more than 87% of world production and use.
Nigeria
, the
largest producer and consumer
, accounts for
46% of production worldwide.
In the Indian context
, it is a
minor pulse
cultivated mainly in arid and
semi-arid tracts of
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, and West UP,
along with considerable areas in Rajasthan, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu, Maharashtra, and Gujarat.
Click to View More
Source :
‘Life sprouts in space’, says ISRO after cowpea seeds germinate
Geography
**********What is Nanopore Technology?
Nanopore technology represents humanity’s latest weapon in the ongoing battle against diseases.
About Nanopore Technology:
Nanopore technology refers to
nano-scale holes
embedded
in a thin membrane structure
detect the potential change when charged biological molecules
smaller than nanopores
pass through the hole.
It has the
potential to sense and analyze
single-molecule
amino acids, DNA, RNA, etc.
It is a cutting-edge method for
sequencing DNA and RNA by detecting changes in electrical conductivity
as molecules pass through a nanopore.
In contrast to other sequencing technologies, nanopore‐based sequencing is
cheaper
, very
easy to use
does not require much computational and lab infrastructure
, and only
needs a small amount of DNA in a test sample
It is the
only sequencing technology that offers real-time analysis in fully scalable formats,
from pocket to population scale, that can analyze native DNA or RNA and sequence any length of fragment to achieve short to ultra-long read lengths.
It can also
undertake targeted sequencing
with a focus on specific genes/regions.
Click to View More
Source :
Nanopores: A game-changer in early disease detection
Science & Tech
**********Black-collared yellow catfish
Researchers at the Centre for Peninsular Aquatic Genetic Resources, Kochi, of the National Bureau for Fish Genetic Resources (NBFGR) claimed to have developed captive breeding protocol for black-collared yellow catfish.
About Black-collared yellow catfish:
It is endemic to the
Chalakudy river in Kerala.
It is characterized by its greenish-brown mottled coloration, shorter barbels, and distinct genetic traits, the
species coexists
with the
endangered Horabagrus Nigricollaris.
It has been
classified as endangered
in the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List.
The
captive breeding programme
of the fish began in 2020, and the first generation stock was successfully bred by the researchers.
The development of the breeding technique will help in the
conservation of the species
National Bureau for Fish Genetic Resources (NBFGR):
It was established in
1983 in Allahabad (Prayagra
j)
under the aegis of
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
It aims to undertake research related to the
conservation of fish germplasm resources
of the country.
Its
vision is assessment and conservation of fish genetic resources for intellectual property protection, sustainable utilization and posterity.
Click to View More
Source :
Researchers develop captive breeding protocol for endangered catfish
Environment & Ecology
**********Rani Velu Nachiyar
Recently, the Prime Minister of India remembered the courageous Rani Velu Nachiyar on her birth anniversary.
About Rani Velu Nachiyar:
She was
born in January 3, 1730
Ramanathapuram
the only child of Raja Chellamuthu vijayaragunatha Sethupathy and Rani Sakandhimuthal of the Ramnad kingdom.
At the age of 16, she married the prince of Sivaganga, Muthuvadugananthur Udaiyathevar.
She is known by
Tamils as Veeramangai.
She was trained in war to match weapons usage,
martial arts like Valari, Silambam
(fighting using the stick), horse riding and archery.
She was skilled in the art of warfare and weaponry, Velu Nachiyar was also a scholar, and mastered
several languages including English, French and Urdu.
In collaboration with Hyder Ali and Gopala Nayaker, she waged a war
against the British and emerged victoriously.
She was the first queen to fight for the freedom from the British in India. She granted powers to the
Marudu brothers to administer
the country in 1780.
Click to View More
Source :
Prime Minister remembers Rani Velu Nachiyar on her birth anniversary
History & Culture
**********Export Inspection Council
Recently, the Export Inspection Council (EIC) has initiated a detailed gap assessment study on food testing infrastructure for exports.
About Export Inspection Council:
It was set up by the Government of India under Section 3 of the
Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963.
It ensures sound development of export trade of India through quality control and inspection and matters connected therewith.
It is the
official export–certification body of India,
which ensures quality and safety of products exported from India.
It is headed by a Chair
person
. The Executive Head of the Council is the
Director of Inspection & Quality Control
who is responsible for day to day functioning of the Council.
Function:
The role of EIC is to ensure that products notified under the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act 1963 are meeting the requirements of the importing
countries in respect of their quality and safety.
EIC provides mandatory
certification for
various Food items namely fish & fishery products, dairy product, honey, egg products, meat and meat products, poultry meat products, animal casing, Gelatine, Ossein and crushed bones and feed additive and pre-mixtures while other food and non-food products are certified on voluntary basis.
The Export Inspection Agencies (EIAs) located at Mumbai, Kolkata, Kochi, Delhi and Chennai with a network of 30 sub offices backed by the state of art, NABL accredited laboratories at various places.
Headquarter:
Nodal Ministry:
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Click to View More
Source :
Govt planning to ramp up food testing infrastructure to boost exports: Official
Economy
**********Quadrantid Meteor
The world is all set to witness the first meteor shower of the year i.e Quadrantid Meteor in this month.
About Quadrantid Meteor:
It occurs
every
year in early January.
It is among one of the most intense annual meteor displays, and has a brief peak lasting only a few hours.
The name Quadrantids comes from the now obsolete
constellation Quadrans Muralis
, which was named in 1975 by French astronomer JJ Lalande.
The meteor shower was observed for
the first time in the 1830s
by Belgian astronomer Adolphe Quetelet.
Origin:
It branches from the northeast corner of
the Boötes constellation.
The Quadrantids reportedly
emerged from asteroid 2003 EH1,
which is believed to be a fragment of an extinct comet that broke down in 1490-91.
In its peak activity, observers can spot
60 to 120 meteors per hour
. However, the visibility depends mainly on location and timing.
This year the viewing conditions will largely favour North America, especially for those in Mississippi. Apart from the US, Canada, certain regions in Northern Europe, and Russia, China, Japan, and Korea are likely to witness the shower.
Click to View More
Source :
First meteor shower of 2025: What are Quadrantids and where can you watch them?
Science & Tech
**********Rabbit Fever
As per a recent report 'rabbit fever' has witnessed more than 50 per cent rise in the US in recent years.
About Rabbit Fever:
It is also commonly known as
rare
and sometimes deadly infectious disease is seen in
children between the 5-9 years age group, older men,
and American Indians or Alaska Natives.
It is caused by the
Francisella tularensis
a bacterium, that
can infect animals and people. Rabbits, hares and rodents are more likely to get the disease
, hence the name.
Symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of tularemia can depend on how the bacteria has entered the body.
The illness can be mild or severe and high grade
is a common symptom in all kinds of illnesses.
Skin ulcers
(observed after a tick or deer fly bite),
Irritation and inflammation in eyes
Difficulty in breathing
Sore throat, mouth ulcer
, etc. are oth
er symptoms.
Transmission:
People can also become infected in many ways,
including tick and deer fly bites,
and contact with infected animals like rabbits, rodents, and hares.
The infection can also spread by
drinking contaminated water
and inhaling contaminated aerosols or agricultural and landscaping dust, and laboratory exposure,
Treatment:
Vaccination for tularemia is not yet available
in the U.S. It can be treated with antibiotics.
Click to View More
Source :
What is 'rabbit fever', the rare disease up by 56% in the US? Signs and symptoms explained
Science & Tech
**********Opportunities and Challenges of Blinkit’s 10-Minute Ambulance Service
Why in News?
A day after Blinkit, a Zomato-owned quick commerce platform, announced the launch of a 10-minute ambulance service, Union Commerce Minister Piyush Goyal emphasized the need for the initiative to adhere to India’s legal framework.
The announcement has sparked discussions about regulatory compliance, healthcare accessibility, and the state’s accountability in providing basic services.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Government's Caution and Legal Obligations
Blinkit’s Ambulance Service Details
India’s Need for Ambulance Services
Government and Market Dynamics
Conclusion
Government's Caution and Legal Obligations:
Compliance with laws:
Union Minister Piyush Goyal underscored that Blinkit must meet legal requirements under Indian law, including guidelines outlined in
the Central Motor Vehicle Rules and Automotive Industry Standard (AIS) 125.
State-level variations:
For ambulances supported by the National Health Mission (NHM), compliance depends on agreements between operators and state governments.
Concerns raised:
Experts have highlighted regulatory gaps and the pressing issue of ambulance shortages in India.
Blinkit’s Ambulance Service Details:
Service launch:
The initiative will start with five ambulances in Gurugram, with plans to expand to all major cities within two years.
Features and pricing:
Each ambulance is equipped with essential life-saving equipment like oxygen cylinders, AEDs, monitors, and emergency medicines, staffed by a paramedic, an assistant, and a trained driver.
The service is priced at a flat Rs 2,000 fee.
Non-profit motive:
Blinkit CEO Albinder Dhindsa emphasized that the service aims to address critical healthcare gaps rather than generate profit.
India’s Need for Ambulance Services:
Pandemic lessons:
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed severe shortages in ambulance services, particularly during emergencies.
Current landscape:
India has 17,495 operational Basic Life Support (BLS) ambulances and only 3,441 Advanced Life Support (ALS) ambulances.
Regional disparities persist, with northeastern states particularly underserved.
Importance of ALS ambulances:
These are crucial for trauma-related emergencies during the “golden hour” and are better equipped for critical care.
Government and Market Dynamics:
National Ambulance Services (NAS):
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare supports one ALS ambulance per 5 lakh population and one BLS ambulance per 1 lakh population.
States can request additional ambulances to address regional needs.
Market growth:
The Indian ambulance market, valued at $1,502.8 million in 2022, is projected to grow at a 5.12% CAGR from 2024 to 2028.
Registration trends:
Ambulance registrations peaked in 2021 but have since declined, indicating reduced focus on healthcare post-pandemic.
Conclusion:
Blinkit’s 10-minute ambulance service initiative has the potential to address critical gaps in India’s healthcare infrastructure.
However, ensuring regulatory compliance, addressing regional disparities, and increasing the number of ALS ambulances remain key challenges.
As private players like Blinkit step in, the government must simultaneously strengthen its healthcare delivery systems to meet the growing demands of the population.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  6.5 MB  )
Click to View More
Social Issues
**********DPIIT Deregisters Patent Agent Over Alleged Misconduct
Why in the News?
A patent agent has been removed from the Register of Patent Agents for “alleged professional misconduct” by a committee formed by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT).
What’s in Today’s Article?
About Patent & IP Rights (Meaning, about Patents Act 1970, Patents Amendment Rules 2021)
National IPR Policy (Objectives of the Policy)
News Summary
Understanding Patents and Intellectual Property (IP) Rights:
Definition of Patents:
A patent is a type of intellectual property right that grants an inventor exclusive rights over their invention for a limited time, as approved by the government.
It prevents others from copying or using the invention without permission.
Types of Patents:
Product Patent:
Protects the final product, ensuring no one else can manufacture or sell it without the patent holder's consent during the patent period.
Process Patent:
Allows others to produce the patented product by altering the manufacturing process.
Historical Context in India:
Initially, India adopted
process patenting
in the 1970s, which enabled the country to become a global leader in producing generic drugs.
Post-TRIPS Agreement (an international trade agreement under the WTO), India also introduced
product patenting
to comply with global standards.
Patent Act, 1970:
The Patents Act, 1970, and its accompanying rules (Patents Rules, 1972) came into effect in April 1972, replacing the earlier Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911.
It was based on recommendations from the
Ayyangar Committee Report
, led by Justice N. Rajagopala Ayyangar.
India’s International Patent Commitments:
Paris Convention (1998):
Covers various aspects of industrial property, such as patents, trademarks, and industrial designs, to promote international protection.
Patent Cooperation Treaty (1998):
Simplifies patent filing across multiple countries.
Budapest Treaty (2001):
Eases the process of depositing microorganisms for patent purposes internationally.
Amendments:
The Patents Act has been amended several times to stay updated with global trends and domestic needs.
Patents (Amendment) Rules, 2021:
Notified By:
The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) in September 2021.
Key Changes:
Expanded Applicant Categories:
Educational institutions are now included as a distinct category alongside natural persons, startups, and small entities.
Rebates on Filing Fees:
Educational institutions can avail an 80% rebate on patent filing fees, encouraging innovation and the commercialization of new technologies.
National Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Policy, 2016:
The Union Cabinet approved the IPR Policy in 2016 to provide a strategic roadmap for managing IPRs in India.
Theme:
"Creative India; Innovative India"
Objectives:
Awareness and Promotion:
Educate society on the economic, social, and cultural benefits of IPRs.
Fostering Innovation:
Encourage the generation and protection of new IPRs.
Legal Modernization:
Replace outdated laws with effective IPR laws that balance owner rights and public interest.
Human Capital Development:
Build capacity in teaching, research, and skill-building in IPR.
Efficient Administration:
Strengthen the IPR administration to make it modern and service-oriented.
Commercialization:
Maximize the economic value of IPRs through commercialization.
Enforcement:
Reinforce mechanisms to combat IPR infringements effectively.
News Summary:
In a landmark decision, a patent agent, Naveen Chaklan, has been removed from the
for alleged professional misconduct.
The decision was made by a five-member ad-hoc committee formed by the
under the direction of the Delhi High Court.
The committee found Chaklan guilty of negligence, resulting in harassment, financial loss, and mental agony for his client,
Saurav Chaudhary
Case Highlights:
Chaklan charged Chaudhary Rs 51,000 for filing and expediting a patent application for a sewing machine in 2019. However, the application was deemed abandoned as Chaklan failed to inform the client about the
First Examination Report (FER)
Chaudhary filed a writ petition in 2023 seeking restoration of the patent application, prompting the High Court to direct the formation of an ad-hoc committee to investigate misconduct by patent agents.
Findings and Actions:
The committee noted that 60% of the over 100 applications filed by Chaklan were either abandoned or withdrawn, raising questions about his fiduciary duty, ethical conduct, and accountability.
Chaklan claimed his mistake was unintentional, citing lack of mentorship and resources as a solo practitioner. He criticized the decision as "harsh and disproportional."
The committee observed that this case serves as an example to reinforce accountability and ethical practices among patent agents.
Broader Implications:
The High Court directed CGPDTM to draft and publish a
Code of Conduct
for patent and trademark agents to regulate professional behaviour.
A framework for handling complaints against patent and trademark agents must also be established by the same deadline.
Until then, complaints will be handled by an ad-hoc committee consisting of officials and senior IP practitioners with at least 15 years of experience.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  1.7 MB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********Why was the no-detention policy rolled back?
Context:
In December 2024, the Union government amended the Rules of the Right to Education (RTE) Act, 2009, allowing schools, including Central government-run schools, to detain students in Classes 5 and 8 if they fail year-end examinations.
Students will have a second chance to pass through a re-examination after two months of additional teaching. This move aligns with a 2019 amendment that rolled back the RTE Act’s no-detention policy, with 18 States and UTs already reinstating the option to detain students.
What’s in today’s article?
Rationale behind the no-detention policy
Why has no-detention policy been rolled back?
Way forward
Original No-Detention Policy under RTE Act (2009)
The RTE Act, 2009, included Section 16, which prohibited detention or expulsion of students from Classes 1 to 8.
The aim was to create a stress-free learning environment and shift away from high-pressure, single-exam assessments.
Challenges in Implementation
Misinterpretation of No-Detention Policy
: Many schools misapplied the policy, leading to the absence of testing and reduced accountability for teaching outcomes.
Automatic Promotions
: Government schools often promoted students automatically without assessing whether they acquired grade-specific skills.
Lack of Focus on Outcomes
: Monitoring systems emphasized inputs rather than learning outcomes.
Failure of Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE)
Implementation Issues
: Efforts to introduce CCE with support from UNICEF were hindered by inadequate resources, teacher training, and lack of commitment.
Poor Execution:
Teachers often filled NCERT’s CCE forms en masse without assessing individual students’ skills.
Abandonment of CCE:
Many boards reverted to traditional year-end examinations, abandoning the CCE model of multiple assessments.
Key Observation
Experts highlighted that the poor implementation of the no-detention policy and CCE led to a decline in teaching standards and learning outcomes.
Alarming Learning Gaps in Indian Schools
Surveys reveal significant deficits in basic literacy and numeracy skills among Indian students, highlighting a worsening trend over recent years.
Findings from the ASER Report
Class 5 Literacy and Arithmetic Decline
In 2022, only 42.8% of Class 5 students could read a Class 2-level text, down from 50.5% in 2018.
Only 25.6% could solve basic arithmetic problems, a drop from 27.9% in 2018.
Youth Foundational Skill Gaps (ASER 2023):
A quarter of 14- to 18-year-olds cannot fluently read a Class 2-level text in their regional language.
Over half struggle with division problems taught in Classes 3 and 4.
High Failure Rates in Board Examinations (2023)
Classes 10 and 12 Results
: Over 65 lakh students failed across 59 boards.
Failure rates
: 12% in national boards, 18% in State boards.
Expert Opinions on Learning Gaps
Impact of Automatic Promotions
Promoting all students without accountability in lower classes harms them in later life. COVID-19 disruptions worsened the learning gap.
Evidence-Based Decision Making
Experts supported the rollback of the no-detention policy as a response to the evident learning crisis.
Need for Better Mechanisms
Analysts, however, called for improved systems to assess children’s learning outcomes and hold teachers accountable, rather than regressing to detention practices.
Way Forward
Call for Timely Remedial Action
Regular assessments must be conducted at the school level for every class, rather than relying on board-level evaluations.
Teachers are the best judges of a child’s learning and should be trusted and equipped for this responsibility.
Focus on Targeted Support and Accountability
Class teachers are required to identify learning gaps and provide specialised inputs at various stages.
School Heads are mandated to personally monitor the progress of children who are held back, introducing more accountability.
Shifting Accountability from Students to Teachers
Detaining students punishes them for not performing well, instead of addressing the root cause.
Teachers must be held accountable for inclusive teaching and their focus on all students, including those from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Recommendations for Teacher Accountability
Introduce rigorous teacher appraisals to ensure inclusivity and fairness in teaching.
Implement consequences for teachers failing to meet standards, along with incentives to encourage better performance.
Why was the no-detention policy rolled back.pdf
( Size:  390.6 KB  )
Click to View More
Social Issues
**********Manipur Governor suggests use of NSA against miscreants in Manipur
Why in news?
Manipur Governor Ajay Kumar Bhalla held a security review meeting, a day after assuming office, to address the State's law and order situation, particularly in border areas.
He urged the use of legal measures, including the
National Security Act, 1980
, against troublemakers and emphasized creating employment opportunities for misguided youth. The Governor also directed security agencies to prepare dossiers on key suspects inciting violence.
What’s in today’s article?
Historical Background
Colonial Era Laws:
Bengal Regulation III (1818):
Empowered the arrest of individuals for criminal intent.
Rowlatt Acts (1919):
Allowed imprisonment without trial.
Post-Independence Evolution:
Preventive Detention Act (1950):
Expired in 1969.
Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA, 1971):
Introduced by Indira Gandhi, repealed in 1977 by the Janata Party.
NSA (1980):
Brought back by Indira Gandhi after her return to power, drawing parallels with MISA.
About
The National Security Act (NSA), promulgated on September 23, 1980, is a preventive detention law enacted by the Indian Parliament.
It empowers the central or state government to detain individuals to prevent activities jeopardizing national security or disrupting public order.
Constitutional Basis
Article 22(3):
Allows preventive detention for state security and public order.
Article 22(4):
Restricts detention beyond three months unless approved by an advisory board comprising High Court judges.
44th Amendment Act (1978):
Reduced the detention period without advisory board approval to two months, though this provision is not yet enforced.
Key Provisions of NSA
Detention can extend up to 12 months, subject to fresh evidence for further extension.
No formal charges are necessary during the detention period.
Detention is permissible to:
Prevent disruptions to public order.
Ensure supplies and services essential to the community.
Grounds for Detention
Under Section 3 of the NSA, the Central/State Government has the power to order any person’s detention and detain them if it thinks it is necessary to prevent them from harming:
national defence;
relationship with foreign countries;
national security;
public order;
essential supplies and services.
Period of Confinement
Maximum detention period
: 12 months (extendable with fresh evidence).
Detainees can be held for 10 days without being informed of charges.
Legal Process
: The detainee can appeal to the advisory board but is denied legal representation during the trial.
Criticism of the NSA
Authorities have been accused of using NSA as an extra-judicial power.
Detainees are often held without formal charges, leading to concerns about human rights violations.
About the news
A day after assuming charge, Manipur Governor Ajay Kumar Bhalla held a security review meeting.
In this meeting, the Governor suggested that the State police use legal options such as the National Security Act, 1980.
Highlighted ceasefire violations
The meeting highlighted ceasefire violations by the Pambei faction of the UNLF, a Meitei insurgent group advocating secession, despite its peace pact signed in November 2023.
Violence was reported in Yaingangpokpi, a buffer zone between the valley and the hills, where bunkers set up by Kuki-Zo volunteers were dismantled by security forces.
In Kangpokpi, protests organized by the Kuki-Zo group turned violent, injuring the SP.
Armed cadres of Kuki-Zo insurgent groups, who had signed a Suspension of Operations agreement in 2008, were seen on the streets trying to control the unrest, a violation of ground rules requiring them to stay in designated camps.
Tensions in buffer zone
Buffer zones have been created since June 2023 to prevent clashes between
Meiteis (valley)
Kuki-Zos (hills)
Intermittent firing between the communities, particularly from bunkers in strategic locations, has fuelled tensions.
Manipur Governor suggests use of NSA against miscreants in Manipur.pdf
( Size:  316.7 KB  )
Click to View More
Defence & Security
**********