Lateral Entry in Central Government
Why in the News?
The Union Service Public Commission has sought applications for lateral entry from private sector, state/UT government and PSU employees for 45 posts of Joint Secretary, Director and Deputy Secretary across 24 Central ministries.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Lateral Entry (Purpose, Process, Pros, Cons, Examples, etc.)
News Summary
About Lateral Entry in Civil Services:
Lateral entry in administration is the
appointment of specialists from the private sector in government organisations
It was recommended by the NITI Aayog in its Three-year Action Agenda and also the Group of Secretaries (GoS) on Governance had in its report recommended the induction of personnel in the middle and senior management level in the government.
Objective
Lateral entry was introduced to serve the twin purpose of:
Bringing in
domain expertise
in the civil services,
Addressing the problem of
shortage of IAS officers
at the Centre.
With lateral entry, the government aims to recruit outstanding individuals, with expertise in revenue, financial services, economic affairs, agriculture, cooperation and farmers’ welfare, road transport and highway, civil aviation, commerce among many other sectors to serve for the benefit of the country.
Process of Lateral Entry Recruitment:
The selection process for lateral entry into administration is conducted by the
Union Public Service Commission (UPSC)
The Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT
asks the UPSC to conduct the selection process for lateral entry to various positions in government departments and ministries.
Subsequently, the UPSC invites online applications for lateral recruitment for these positions.
Once the candidates have submitted their application, the UPSC conducts interviews of the shortlisted candidates and recommends the list of selected candidates to the DoPT.
The recommended candidates are then appointed by the Government,
generally for a period of 3 to 5 years
Need for Lateral Entry:
Shortage of officers:
There is a shortage of 22.48% or 1,510 officers for the IAS cadre, according to the DoPT.
The IAS and the Indian Police Service (IPS) have a combined shortage of 2,418 officers.
Domain Expertise:
Through lateral entry, domain experts can be recruited from the private sector to the central administration.
This can be helpful in improving efficiency and create a competitive environment in governance delivery.
Pros of Lateral Entry in Civil Services:
Expertise and Specialization:
Lateral entry allows professionals with specialized knowledge and experience from the private sector to contribute to policymaking and implementation, enhancing the quality of governance.
Innovation and Fresh Perspectives:
Individuals from diverse backgrounds bring new ideas, innovative approaches, and fresh perspectives, potentially improving efficiency and effectiveness in public administration.
Merit-Based Selection:
Lateral entry emphasizes merit, skills, and experience over traditional seniority, promoting a performance-oriented culture within the civil services.
Shortening Learning Curve:
Experienced professionals can quickly adapt and contribute without requiring extensive training, which is often needed for career bureaucrats.
Cons of Lateral Entry in Civil Services:
Cultural and Bureaucratic Resistance:
The traditional civil services may resist the inclusion of lateral entrants, potentially leading to friction, lack of cooperation, and integration challenges.
Lack of Public Sector Experience:
Lateral entrants may lack understanding of government procedures, protocols, and the complexities of public administration, affecting their effectiveness.
Potential for Bias:
The selection process for lateral entry could be perceived as biased or politically influenced, raising concerns about transparency and fairness.
Short-Term Focus:
Professionals entering laterally may focus on short-term goals rather than long-term public service commitments, potentially affecting the continuity and sustainability of policies.
US, UK Among Many Countries with Provision for Lateral Entry:
Countries like United States, Belgium, the UK, Australia and New Zealand have institutionalized this practice as a permanent part of their system.
In the United States, it is known as the “
Spoils System
”, wherein the winning political parties appoint their friends and family members to principal governmental posts without any merit.
In countries like the United Kingdom and Ireland, the selection of officers is on the criteria of work experience in the civil as well as the private sector.
Lateral Entry in Central Government:
The Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) has invited applications for lateral entry positions from private sector, state/UT government, and PSU employees for 45 posts of Joint Secretary, Director, and Deputy Secretary across 24 Central ministries.
These positions, including roles in digital economy, natural farming, and advanced chemical cell manufacturing, will be filled on a contractual basis by September 17.
The contract is for three years, extendable to five based on performance.
Candidates must have significant experience, with joint secretaries needing 15 years, directors 10 years, and deputy secretaries 7 years.
Central government employees are not eligible to apply.
Modi govt's biggest push to lateral entry.pdf
( Size:  240.3 KB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Governor Sanctioning the Prosecution of the Chief Minister
Why in News?
Karnataka Governor sanctioned the prosecution of the Chief Minister in a case of alleged corruption in the allotment of land to his wife by the Mysuru Urban Development Authority (MUDA).
What’s in Today’s Article?
What is the MUDA ‘Scam’?
Powers of Sanctioning the Prosecution of the CM
Intention Behind Governor’s Decision and its Criticism
Other Instances When Governors Moved Against CMs
Powers of Sanctioning the Prosecution of the CM:
Legal provisions:
The sanction has been given (under
the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988, and the Bharatiya Nagarika Suraksha Samhitha 2023
) based on petitions submitted by social activists.
The SC ruling on Governor’s discretion:
The Governor cited
a 2004 ruling by a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court
related to Madhya Pradesh.
The top court had held that if Governors did not use their discretion based on facts and circumstances,
it would lead to a complete breakdown of rule of law.
Intention Behind Governor’s Decision and its Criticism:
Intention:
The Governor is prima facie satisfied that the allegations and the supporting materials disclose commission of offences.
The sanction will ensure that a
neutral, objective and non-partisan investigation
should be conducted.
Criticism of Governor’s decision:
The State government accused the Governor of acting at the behest of the central leadership.
The State Cabinet unanimously condemned the central government for misusing the Raj Bhavan to
destabilise the government in Karnataka
, terming the sanction -
Illegal,
Unconstitutional and
Against the spirit of democracy and federalism.
Other Instances When Governors Moved Against CMs:
The question of Governor’s discretion:
The question whether a Governor can accord sanction to prosecute a CM on his own discretion, rather than the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers, has been addressed only in a few cases.
Case of Maharashtra:
The question concerning the prosecution of former Maharashtra CM (A.R. Antulay) resulted in a judgement by a two-member SC Bench in 1982 that held in favour of the Governor’s discretion.
Case of TN:
This belongs to a decision to prosecute a serving CM (Jayalalithaa) on the basis of a sanction issued by the then Tamil Nadu Governor (Marri Channa Reddy) in 1995.
A Division Bench of the Madras HC rejected her challenge to the sanction order, citing the Governor’s immunity under
Article 361
that protected him from being answerable to any court regarding his functions.
When Governors moved against Chief Ministers in the recent past.pdf
( Size:  269.8 KB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Need for a Central Protection Act for Doctors
Why in news?
Resident doctors across India are on strike, demanding laws to ensure their safety after the rape and murder of a young doctor at R.G. Kar Medical College in Kolkata on August 9.
The protests began after her body was found in the hospital's emergency building, with doctors criticizing the hospital and State government for attempting to downplay the incident. They highlight the lack of a Central law to protect healthcare workers.
What’s in today’s article?
Current status
Situation around the world
Demands of doctors
Steps taken by the Centre
Legal provisions
As per constitutional provisions, health and law and order are State subjects.
Hence, it is the primary responsibility of the State government or Union Territory administration to take note of events and eventualities, and do what is necessary to prevent violence.
It should be noted that, the details of the number of fatalities of medical professionals due to attacks by families of patients are not maintained centrally.
Violence against healthcare workers at the workplace is not new in India
In 1973,
Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug
working as a junior nurse at King Edward Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, was sexually assaulted by a hospital sweeper.
She died in 2015 after spending over 41 years in a vegetative state following the attack.
Need for a safe work environment
Experts have pointed out that medical colleges often have ill-lit corridors, poorly secured wards, and long distances between departments.
There is an urgent need to improve working and living conditions by ensuring proper lighting, security guards, cameras, and manned walk-throughs between departments, operation theatres, and emergency areas.
These simple measures could make a real difference.
Violence against healthcare workers is a global issue, but several countries have implemented effective measures to protect their medical professionals.
U.K.
enforces a zero-tolerance policy on violence, supported by a dedicated security team and a comprehensive reporting system.
U.S.,
some States classify assaults on healthcare workers as felonies, acting as a strong deterrent.
Australian hospitals
have introduced safety measures like security personnel, panic buttons, and mandatory de-escalation training.
India must urgently introduce a Central protection Act
and adopt similar measures to take stringent actions to ensure a safer environment for its healthcare workers.
The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has urged the Union government to recognize and address violence against doctors at healthcare centers.
In its list of demands, the IMA calls for
hospital security protocols similar to those at airports, declaring healthcare centers as safe zones with mandatory security measures like CCTVs and security personnel
The IMA highlighted the poor working conditions of doctors, noting that the victim was on a 36-hour shift with no safe place to rest.
It also emphasized the need for a thorough investigation of the crime, justice for the victim, identification and punishment of those responsible for vandalism, and appropriate compensation for the victim's family.
Recently, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued an order
requiring the head of an institution to file an FIR within six hours in the event of any violence
against healthcare workers on duty.
This order responds to the increasing violence against doctors and healthcare staff in government hospitals, often perpetrated by patients or their attendants.
Additionally, the National Medical Commission (NMC) has directed all medical colleges to develop policies ensuring a safe work environment for staff.
The NMC also mandated that incidents of violence against medical students be promptly investigated, with an FIR filed and a detailed report sent to the NMC within 48 hours.
Need for a Central Protection Act for Doctors.pdf
( Size:  1.4 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Global South Summit 2024
Why in news?
The 3rd Voice of the Global South Summit (VOGSS) was hosted by India in
virtual format
.
India had hosted the 1st VOGSS in January 2023, and the 2nd VOGSS in November 2023, both in virtual format.
What’s in today’s article?
Not a geographical line
Despite how it sounds, it is not really a geographical term
Many countries included in the Global South are in the northern hemisphere, such as India, China and all of those in the northern half of Africa.
Australia and New Zealand, both in the southern hemisphere, are not in the Global South.
Brandt Line as the border
Many people refer to the Brandt Line as the border.
The line was proposed by former German Chancellor Willy Brandt in the 1980s as a
visual depiction of the north-south divide based upon per-capita GDP
It starts in the north of Mexico, goes across the top of Africa and the Middle East, makes a loop around India and China, and then goes down to include most of East Asia.
It doesn't include Japan, Australia, or New Zealand
Global South as a concept
The Global South is a geographical, geopolitical, historical and developmental concept, all at the same time — with exceptions.
India Emerged As The Voice Of Global South
One of the various visions of G20 presidency:
When India assumed the G20 presidency on December 1, 2022, it set out various visions for the nation's year-long presidency and the Global South was one of them.
India organized eight ministerial-level thematic segments to address the most pressing concerns of the developing world.
Raised the issues concerning Global South
on the international forums and at the United Nations meetings and conferences.
During Covid-19 pandemic:
Made-in-India vaccines were sent to about 100 countries. ~150 nations imported medicines during this period from the Pharmacy of the World.
Hosted the Voice of Global South Summit on a regular basis:
India even ensured that the region remained centre stage at the G7 Summit in Hiroshima in May this year.
African Union as a full member of G20
were admitted under India’s presidency.
Proposal to launch a satellite:
During the G20 Summit, India proposed to launch a satellite for monitoring weather and climate monitoring for Global South.
The 15th BRICS Summit in South Africa:
During this summit, PM Modi said that the Global South is not just a diplomatic term but represents the
shared history of these countries against colonialism and apartheid based on which modern relations are being reshaped
Two-day event on international taxation:
In an attempt to voice the views of the Global South on important international issues, India held a two-day event on International Taxation at the National Academy of Direct Taxes (NADT).
This event was an initiative of the Indian Presidency to bolster capacity building for Indian tax officials in the area of International Taxation, with a global south perspective.
India-UN Capacity Building Initiative:
In September 2023, the “
” was announced at the event titled “India-UN for the Global South-Delivering for Development”.
The initiative aims to share the country's best practices with partner countries in the Global South.
Inauguration of DAKSHIN:
During the second Voice of Global South summit, PM Modi inaugurated a global centre for excellence for the Global South countries called DAKSHIN.
The 3rd VOGSS was structured into Leaders’ Session and Ministerial sessions.
The inaugural session was at Head of State / Government level and was hosted by PM Modi.
The theme of the Inaugural Leaders’ Session was same as the overarching theme of the Summit, i.e., "
An Empowered Global South for a Sustainable Future
Key highlights of the speech delivered by PM Modi
Global development compact
He proposed the creation of a human-centric Global Development Compact.
Announcing the ‘Compact’, PM Modi said
needy countries will not be burdened with debt in the name of development finance
The foundation of the ‘Compact’ will be based on India’s development journey and experiences of development partnership.
Under this Compact, members will focus on trade for development, capacity building for sustainable growth, technology sharing, project-specific concessional finance and grants.
To strengthen trade promotion activities, India will start a special fund of USD 2.5 million.
Global challenges faced by countries
There is an atmosphere of uncertainty all around” and the “world has not yet fully come out of the effects of Covid.
The situation of war has posed challenges to our development journey.
We are already facing challenges of climate change, and now there are also concerns about health security, food security, and energy security.
Terrorism, extremism and separatism remain a serious threat to our societies.
Technology divide and new economic & social challenges related to technology are also emerging.
He underlined that the
solution to various global conflicts and tensions lies in inclusive global governance.
Highlighted failure of global institutions
Global governance and financial institutions formed in the last century have been unable to fight the challenges of this century.
Global South needs to unite
He urged for steps to be taken to reduce the gap between the Global North and the Global South.
He mentioned that the upcoming Summit of the Future at the UN next month could be an important milestone for this.
He emphasized that the Global South needs to unite, stand together with one voice, become each other’s strength, and learn from each other’s experiences.
India's Contribution to Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) in the Global South
The Prime Minister referred to last year's G20 presidency, stating that the Global DPI Repository, created under India's leadership, marked the
first-ever multilateral consensus on DPI
He expressed satisfaction that agreements have been signed to share the '
India Stack'
with 12 partners from the Global South.
To further accelerate DPI development in the Global South, India has established a
Social Impact Fund
and will
make an initial contribution of USD 25 million
Global South Summit 2024.pdf
( Size:  2.3 MB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********