What is Ottavalo’s Andean Mouse?
A new species of mouse with a remarkably long tail, dubbed Otavalo’s Andean mouse, has been discovered near a dormant volcano in Ecuador.
About Ottavalo’s Andean Mouse:
It is a
long tail.
It was discovered near Mojanda, a dormant volcano with a caldera filled with The site is about a 50-mile trip from Quito, a city situated in the
high Andes of
northern Ecuador.
It has been identified as
endemic to the temperate, high-altitude Andean regions of the montane forest.
named
in honor of the local Otavalo culture,
which is widely recognized for its musical heritage and skilled weaving and textile commerce.
Features
In comparison to related species, the Otavalos Andean mouse is
slightly larger
, with
shorter hair on its back
It has a coat of “fine, dense, and soft” fur.
The fur on its back and sides is described as “dark drab,” while its sides show a more brownish tone.
On its stomach, the fur is a lighter gray with a hint of “ground cinnamon,” giving it a distinct color gradient across its body.
most distinguishable feature
of the new mouse species is its
, which is
longer than the length of the entire body
The tail is overall
covered with fine hairs
and a row of scales with a white tip.
Click to View More
Source :
This newly discovered mammal species has a tail that is longer than its entire body
Environment
**********What is a Menhir?
An Iron Age menhir, a memorial pillar locally known as ‘Niluvu Rayi’ found in Kamasanpalli village of Nagarkurnool district in Telangana, faces neglect.
About Menhir:
A menhir is a
large upright standing stone
Menhirs may be
found singly as monoliths, or as part of a group of similar stones.
They are widely distributed across
Europe, Africa, and Asia,
but are
most numerous in Western Europe.
Their size can vary considerably; but their
shape is generally uneven and squared, often tapering towards the top.
Often menhirs were
placed together, forming circles,
semicircles, or vast ellipses.
Megalithic menhirs were
also placed in several parallel rows, called alignments
. The
most famous
of these are the
Carnac, France, alignments
, which include 2,935 menhirs.
They are sometimes engraved with abstract forms (line, spiral) or with objects' images like axes.
Identifying the uses of menhirs remains speculation. However, it is likely that many uses involved fertility rites and seasonal cycles.
Click to View More
Source :
Neglected Iron Age menhir in Telangana’s Nagarkurnool faces destruction
Art and Culture
**********One Sun One World One Grid' (OSOWOG) initiative
India is in advanced discussions with Oman, UAE, Saudi Arabia, Maldives, and Singapore to establish cross-border electricity transmission lines as part of the ambitious 'One Sun One World One Grid' (OSOWOG) initiative.
About
:
The idea for the OSOWOG initiative was put forth by the Prime Minister of India, at the First Assembly of the International Solar Alliance (ISA) in October 2018.
It is an initiative to introduce a
transnational electricity grid that supplies power worldwide.
The project is being spearheaded by the governments of
India and the UK in partnership
the International Solar Alliance (ISA) and the World Bank Group.
Vision
: It aims to connect different
regional grids through a common grid
that will be used to transfer renewable energy power and, thus, realize the potential of renewable energy sources, especially solar energy.
The idea is to harness solar and other renewable energy sources from different parts of the world,
where the sun is shining at any given moment
, and efficiently transmit that power to areas where it is needed.
OSOWOG aims to provide power to about
140 countries through a common grid
that will ensure the transfer of clean and efficient solar power.
The OSOWOG initiative is to be
carried out
in 3 phases:
In the
first phase,
the Indian grid would be connected to the grids of the
Middle East, South Asia,
South-East Asia to
develop a common grid. This grid would then be used to share solar energy as needed, in addition to other renewable energy sources.
second phase
would connect the functional first phase to the pool of
renewable resources in Africa.
third phase
would look at achieving true global interconnection with the aim
of 2,600 GW of interconnection by 2050.
The goal is to integrate as many countries as possible to create a single power grid of renewable energy. This can then be accessed by all countries.
It will bring together a global coalition of national governments, international financial and technical organisations, legislators, power system operators, and knowledge leaders to accelerate the construction of the new infrastructure needed for a world powered by clean energy.
Click to View More
Source :
India in talks with Gulf, Asia nations for cross-border power grid links under OSOWOG
Economy
**********Shettihalli Wildlife Sanctuary
Environmental activists have sounded an alarm over the growing threat to elephants in Shettihalli Wildlife Sanctuary, following the death of a young male elephant due to electrocution.
About Shettihalli Wildlife Sanctuary:
Location
: It is located in Shimoga District of
Karnataka
It covers an area of 395.6 sq. km.
It was declared a wildlife sanctuary on 23rd November 1974.
Mandagadde Natural Bird Sanctuary
, present on a small
island in the River Tunga,
is also a
part of this sanctuary.
The
Tunga Anicut Dam
is situated within the sanctuary and provides shelter for otters and water birds.
There are a
large number of human settlements
inside Shettihalli Sanctuary, mainly consisting of families that were displaced by the construction of the
Sharavathi Dam
in the 1960s.
Vegetation
The sanctuary has
mostly Dry and Moist Deciduous Forests
in the eastern and central parts.
Towards the west, with an increase in rainfall, there are
Semi-evergreen Forests
Flora
: Major tree species include
silver oak, teak, Indian Thorny Bamboo
, Calcutta Bamboo, Asan, Tectona Grandis, Sweet Indrajao, Amla, etc.
Fauna:
It houses mammals like
Tiger, Leopard, Wild Dog, Jackal, Gaur
, Elephant, Sloth Bear Sambar, Spotted Deer, Wild Pig, Common Langur, Bonnet Macaque, etc.
Birds include
Hornbills, Kingfishers, Bulbuls, Parakeets, Doves, Pigeons,
Babblers, Flycatchers, Munias, Swallows, Woodpeckers, Peafowl, Jungle fowl and Partridges.
Click to View More
Source :
Greens apprise forest minister Khandre about threat to elephants in Shettihalli sanctuary
**********What is Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura (TTP)?
A recent study has found an association between the inactivated COVID-19 vaccine CoronaVac from Sinovac Biotech and immune thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).
About Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura (TTP):
It is a rare,
life-threatening blood disorder.
“Thrombotic” refers to the blood clots that form.
“Thrombocytopenic” means the blood has a lower-than-normal platelet count.
“Purpura” refers to purple bruises caused by bleeding under your skin.
In TTP
blood clots form in small blood vessels
throughout your body.
The clots can
limit or block the flow of blood to your organs
, such as your brain, kidneys, and heart. This can prevent your organs from working properly and damage your organs.
The increased clotting that occurs in TTP also uses up your platelets. Platelets are tiny blood cells that help form blood clots. These cell fragments stick together to seal small cuts and breaks in your blood vessels to stop bleeding.
When your platelets are used up, you
do not have enough platelets to form blood clots when necessary
. This can
cause internal bleeding,
bleeding underneath the skin, and other bleeding problems.
What causes TTP?
TTP occurs when you
do not have the right amount of an enzyme
(a type of protein in your blood) called
enzyme controls how your blood clots
. If you do not have enough ADAMTS13, your body makes too many blood clots.
TTP can be
inherited or acquired.
TTP usually occurs suddenly and lasts for days or weeks, but it can continue for months.
TTP can also cause red blood cells to break apart faster than your body can replace them. This leads to a rare form of anemia called hemolytic anemia.
Symptoms
of TTP may include any of the following:
Bleeding into the skin or mucus membranes
Confusion
Fatigue, weakness
Fever
Headache
Pale skin color or yellowish skin color
Shortness of breath
Fast heart rate
(over 100 beats per minute)
can be fatal.
Without treatment, it can cause long-term problems, such as brain damage or a stroke.
Treatment
Plasma treatments
medicines
are the most common ways to treat TTP. If these treatments do not work, you may need
surgery
Click to View More
Source :
Inactivated COVID-19 vaccine CoronaVac associated with TTP
Science & Tech
**********National Company Law Tribunal
Recently, the Supreme Court of India highlighted that there is often a shortage of members in National Company Law Tribunal and inadequate infrastructure to support their functioning.
About
National Company Law Tribunal:
It is a
quasi-judicial authority
incorporated for dealing with corporate disputes that are of civil nature arising under the Companies Act,2013.
It was constituted on 1 June 2016 under the
Companies Act, 2013.
It was established based on the recommendation of the
Balakrishna Eradi committee
on law relating to the insolvency and the winding up of companies.
Composition:
It shall consist of a President and such number of Judicial and Technical Members as may be required.
What are the Powers of NCLT?
not limited or bound by the rules
laid down in the
Code of Civil Procedure
and is guided by the principles of natural justice, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules that are made by the Central Government.
It can enforce any order that it gives in the same manner as a court would enforce it.
It has the power to
scrutinize its own orders.
It has the power to
regulate their own procedure.
It is the
adjudicating authority
for the insolvency resolution process of companies and limited liability partnerships under
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
Click to View More
Source :
SC ruling brings NCLT under-staffing to the fore
Polity & Governance
**********Caterpillar fungus
New research into a chemical produced by a caterpillar fungus that has shown promise as a possible cancer treatment has revealed how it interacts with genes to interrupt cell growth signals.
About
Caterpillar fungus:
(Ophiocordyceps Sinensis) is a fungal
parasite of larvae
(caterpillars) that belongs to the ghost moth.
It is endemic to the
Tibetan Plateau,
including the adjoining high Himalaya (3,200-4,500 metres above sea level).
It is locally known as
Kira Jari
(in India), Yartsagunbu (in Tibet), Yarso Gumbub (Bhutan), Dong Chong Xia Cao (China) and
Yarsagumba
(in Nepal).
In the Indian Himalayas, the species has been documented in the region from the alpine meadows of protected areas such as Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve, Askot Wildlife Sanctuary, Kanchendzonga Biosphere Reserve and Dehan-Debang Biosphere Reserve.
Conservation status
IUCN:
Vulnerable
What researchers found?
The
chemical Cordycepin
, interrupts the cell growth signals that are overactive in cancer, an approach that could be less damaging to healthy tissues than most currently available treatments.
Cordycepin is converted to
cordycepin triphosphate
, and this molecule was found to directly affect cancer cells.
Click to View More
Source :
Caterpillar fungus can slow down growth of cancer cells
Science & Tech
**********QS World University Rankings: Asia 2025
India with a total of 163 universities ranked is the most represented country in the recently released 16th edition of the World University Rankings: Asia by Quacquarelli Symonds.
About
QS World University Rankings: Asia 2025:
It is published annually
since 2009 by Quacquarelli Symonds,
which highlights the top universities in Asia each year.
The methodology used to create the ranking is similar to that used for the QS World University Rankings, but with some additional indicators and adapted weightings.
11 indicators used
to compile the QS Asia University Rankings are
academic reputation (30%), Employer reputation (20%), Faculty/student ratio (10%), International research network (10%), Citations per paper (10%) and papers per faculty (5%), Staff with a PhD (5%), Proportion of inbound exchange students (2.5%) and proportion of outbound exchange students (2.5%)
Highlights
This ranking assesses 984 institutions covering 25 countries in
Eastern, Southern, South-Eastern and Central Asia.
Peking University
retains the top spot, The University of Hong Kong the second, with the National University of Singapore confirmed in third.
India boasts two institutions within the top 50 and seven in the top 100 of the QS Asia Rankings 2025, with the
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
(IITD) leading at 44th place.
The University of Petroleum and Energy Studies (UPES) achieved the most significant improvement among Indian institutions, climbing 70 spots to 148
Click to View More
Source :
India Shines in QS World University Rankings: Asia (2025)
Polity & Governance
**********Seaplane
Kerala tourism Ministry is launching a seaplane service meant to boost the tourism sector at Bolgatty Waterdrome in Kochi.
About
Seaplane:
It is any of a class of aircraft that can
land, float and take off on water
fixed-winged aeroplane
designed for taking off and landing on water. It offers the public the speed of an aeroplane with the utility of a boat.
Types of
Seaplanes
Floatplanes:
Floatplanes are the
most common type of seaplane
. They have floats, which are buoyant structures, permanently attached to the fuselage. Floatplanes rely solely on water for takeoff and landing, making them ideal for flying over lakes, rivers, and coastal areas.
Flying Boats:
Unlike amphibious seaplanes and floatplanes, flying boats have their
hull entirely designed to float on water
. These aircraft have a boat-like shape, with the main body of the plane floating on the water’s surface. Flying boats are capable of
carrying larger passenger loads
and have the capability to take off and land in rougher water conditions.
Advantages of seaplanes
They can fly low and have access to both land and sea, they are perfectly suitable for
coastal surveillance.
They can observe coastal activity such as
border control, investigations or weather anomalies.
Click to View More
Source :
Kerala to launch seaplane service to boost tourism connectivity
Science & Tech
**********How will Trump Treat illegal Indians?
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background (Context of the Article)
Immigration (Legal Pathway, Repatriation, Trump’s Stance, Challenges, Future Outlook, etc.)
Background:
On October 22, 2024, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) organized a large-scale charter flight to repatriate Indian nationals who lacked legal status to stay in the United States.
This action, part of a larger effort by U.S. authorities to curb "
irregular migration
," led to the repatriation of over 1,100 Indian nationals in the previous fiscal year.
With former President Donald Trump re-elected, his administration has pledged a significant crackdown on illegal immigration, aiming to implement one of the largest deportation operations in U.S. history.
This move has raised concerns about the fate of Indian immigrants who reside in the country illegally or seek entry through irregular channels.
Why Are Indian Nationals Being Repatriated?
The U.S. has ramped up efforts to reduce irregular migration, particularly along its borders with Mexico and Canada.
Indian nationals often attempt to enter the U.S. through the southern border with Mexico, exploiting visa-free entry agreements in certain Latin American countries.
These countries, such as Honduras and Guatemala, allow U.S. visa-holding Indians temporary stay, which traffickers and irregular migrants use to cross into the U.S.
Many of these migrants come from Punjab and Gujarat, with some risking their lives through perilous journeys.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (UCBP) reported that nearly 96,917 Indians were apprehended while attempting illegal entry in 2023, a five-fold increase since 2019
Legal Pathways for Indian Immigration to the U.S.:
Indians seeking legal immigration to the U.S. have several avenues, mostly through employment-based and family-based visas. The U.S. grants approximately 140,000 employment-based immigrant visas annually, divided into five categories:
EB-1
: For individuals with extraordinary abilities, researchers, and multinational managers.
EB-2 and EB-3
: For professionals with advanced degrees and skilled workers.
Special Immigrants (EB-4)
: Includes certain U.S. government employees and refugees from conflict zones.
Investor Visas (EB-5)
: For investors who establish businesses in the U.S.
Each year, thousands of skilled professionals, particularly from India’s technology sector, apply for visas like H-1B to work in the U.S. legally.
Trump’s Stance on Immigration and Potential Impact on Indians:
President Trump has historically adopted a stringent stance on immigration.
His earlier "
Buy American, Hire American
" policy, introduced in 2017, led to an increase in H-1B visa denials, affecting many Indian professionals.
Visa denial rates rose from 13% in 2017 to 21% in 2019 for H-1B applicants.
Trump's administration also made it difficult for Indian firms to transfer employees under L1 visas, impacting cross-border employment in tech and services sectors.
With his renewed focus on deporting undocumented immigrants, Trump's policies are expected to impact not only Latin American immigrants but also Indian nationals living in the U.S. without documentation.
His proposed measures include deploying the National Guard to aid in deportations and potentially invoking the Alien Enemies Act of 1798.
Challenges of Illegal Immigration from India:
The surge in illegal migration from India stems from a mix of economic aspirations and trafficking networks.
Many Indian nationals, particularly from Punjab and Gujarat, take perilous routes via Latin American countries, often paying substantial fees to traffickers.
Tragic incidents, such as the 2022 deaths of a family from Gujarat who froze while attempting to cross the U.S.-Canada border, highlight the dangers involved.
Future Outlook and Conclusion:
Trump administration’s firm stance on immigration is likely to have significant implications for Indian nationals in the U.S., both legal and undocumented
Although his primary focus remains on immigration from Latin America, the spill over effects of these stringent policies will affect Indian immigrants as well.
Indians in the U.S., especially those on temporary work visas, may face stricter scrutiny, while undocumented individuals face an uncertain future.
This evolving scenario emphasizes the importance of understanding legal pathways for immigration and the risks associated with irregular migration.
As U.S. immigration policies continue to evolve, Indian nationals aspiring to work or settle in the U.S. will need to remain informed and cautious in navigating these regulations.
How will Trump treat illegal Indians_.pdf
( Size:  355.1 KB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Snakebite Envenoming
Recently, the Tamil Nadu government has officially declared snakebite envenomation as a notifiable disease under the Tamil Nadu Public Health Act, 1939.
About
Snakebite Envenoming:
It is a
life-threatening medical condition
caused by
venomous snake bites.
It is a major health concern in rural and snake-endemic regions.
It poses a risk to vulnerable populations, including agricultural workers, children, and those living in tropical and subtropical areas.
Snake antivenoms
are effective treatments to prevent or reverse most of the harmful effects of snakebite envenoming and are included in the WHO list of essential medicines.
The
World Health Organization
(WHO) has recognised
snakebite as a global public health issue
and launched a strategy to reduce snakebite-induced deaths and disabilities worldwide.
India’s Action plan
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare earlier this year published the
National Action Plan for Prevention and Control of Snakebite Envenoming.
The plan aims
to halve snakebite deaths by 2030
through a ‘One Health’ approach, integrating human, animal, and environmental health interventions.
Advantages of notifiable disease
By making snakebite a notifiable disease, the Tamil Nadu government aims to improve the collection of vital data, strengthen clinical infrastructure, and ensure the efficient distribution of anti-snake venom.
This move is expected to
lead to better prevention strategies
, reduce mortality rates, and enhance treatment facilities across the state.
Under the new directive, both
government and private hospitals
are now
required to report
cases of snakebites and related fatalities to the government.
This mandatory reporting system will be integrated with the State’s Integrated Health Information Platform under the Integrated Disease Surveillance Program.
Click to View More
Source :
Tamil Nadu declares snakebite envenoming a notifiable disease
Science & Tech
**********Supreme Court’s Landmark Guidelines to Prevent Bulldozer Justice by State
Why in News?
The Supreme Court has established the first-ever guidelines to counter arbitrary demolitions, aiming to protect citizens from unjust actions by state authorities.
This ruling emphasises that demolitions without due process violate the rule of law and highlights the
misuse of “bulldozer justice” in a civilised society
What’s in Today’s Article?
What is Bulldozer Justice?
Case Background
Key Highlights of the Ruling
Wider Impact of the Ruling
Implications of the Ruling
Conclusion
It refers to the
instant justice mechanism
that is propagated by the government of various states to punish the alleged rioters and protestors by
razing down their houses, stalls or any construction with the use of JCB.
Case Background:
The Tibrewal Akash incident:
The guidelines stemmed from a 2019 case in which journalist Manoj Tibrewal Akash’s ancestral property was demolished in Uttar Pradesh.
Authorities cited expansion of a National Highway as the reason, but the court found multiple violations.
No written notice was served, and the demolition exceeded the alleged encroachment area.
The petitioner claimed the demolition was retaliatory, triggered by his father’s demand for an investigation into irregularities in a road project.
NHRC findings:
The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) found the demolition unjustified, as authorities overstepped the encroachment area.
Only 3.70 metres of land allegedly encroached, yet authorities demolished between 5-8 metres.
Key Highlights of the Ruling:
Need for safeguards against arbitrary demolitions:
A bench led by Chief Justice of India (CJI) underscored that arbitrary demolitions
threaten the constitutional right to property
To ensure fair treatment, the court mandated that
all demolitions must be preceded by specific legal steps
, adding accountability for public officials involved in unlawful demolitions.
Mandatory steps before demolition:
The SC outlined six essential procedures that must be followed before any property can be demolished:
Verification of existing land records and maps.
Proper surveys to identify encroachments.
Issuance of written notices to encroachers.
Consideration of objections with formal orders.
Reasonable time allowance for voluntary removal.
Legal acquisition of additional land, if necessary.
Wider Impact of the Ruling:
Disciplinary and criminal action:
The court ordered disciplinary action and criminal charges against officials who approved or executed demolitions without adherence to legal protocols.
This applies to any state action where demolitions are used selectively as punishment.
The UP chief secretary
was instructed to conclude
disciplinary actions within four months
and to investigate arbitrary demolitions thoroughly.
Compensation for damages:
The SC directed
interim compensation of ₹25 lakh
to the petitioner and ordered a review of similar cases in the area.
Implications of the Ruling:
Addresses rising concerns:
Over the use of bulldozers to target minorities, protesters, and critics of governments.
The court clarified that while illegal encroachments must be dealt with,
demolitions must strictly adhere to legal standards
Nationwide implementation:
The court directed that all states and UTs implement these guidelines.
Copies of the judgement were sent to chief secretaries across the country to ensure these procedures are enforced uniformly.
Conclusion:
The SC’s guidelines serve as
a critical reminder of the rule of law
, mandating that demolitions cannot be used as a tool for intimidation or selective punishment.
This landmark decision
enforces public accountability and reaffirms citizens’ rights to property under Article 300A of the Constitution
while establishing a fair and transparent approach to handling encroachments.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  1.0 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Report Reveals 2023 Ransomware Attack on Key Defence Unit
Why in news?
According to the 2023-24 annual report of the Department of Personnel Training (DoPT), a crucial defence unit was affected by a ransomware attack in 2023. The CBI investigated multiple cybercrimes with national security implications, including ransomware, a massive DDOS attack on critical infrastructure, and a malware breach within a Ministry.
What’s in today’s article?
Cyber Attacks
Key Highlights from the 2023-24 DoPT Report
About
A cyber attack is a malicious attempt by individuals or groups to disrupt, damage, or gain unauthorized access to computer systems, networks, or data.
These attacks can result in data breaches, financial losses, and compromised security, affecting individuals, organizations, and even national infrastructures.
Types of Cyber Attacks
Phishing
In phishing attacks, attackers deceive users into providing sensitive information like login credentials or financial details through fake emails or websites.
For example, in a 2020 attack, hackers used phishing emails to impersonate World Health Organization officials, exploiting COVID-19 fears.
Ransomware is a type of malware that locks or encrypts data, demanding ransom for access restoration.
E.g., the WannaCry ransomware attack of 2017 affected organizations worldwide, including the UK’s National Health Service, halting critical healthcare services.
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
In DDoS attacks, attackers flood a server with excessive traffic, overwhelming it and making services unavailable.
disrupted the planned live interview between Elon
Musk
and Donald
Trump
on X during the US Presidential election 2024.
Malware
Malware includes viruses, worms, and spyware that can disrupt systems, steal data, or damage files.
For instance, the 2010 Stuxnet worm targeted Iran's nuclear facilities, sabotaging centrifuges and slowing nuclear development.
Challenges
Evolving Attack Methods
Attackers continually innovate, making it difficult for defenses to keep pace.
Ransomware has evolved to double extortion, where attackers also threaten to release sensitive data if the ransom is unpaid.
Lack of Skilled Cybersecurity Professionals
The demand for skilled cybersecurity experts often outpaces supply, leaving gaps in defense for many organizations.
Cross-Border Complexity
Many cyber attacks originate outside national borders, complicating law enforcement efforts and international collaboration.
Rising Costs and Impact on Critical Infrastructure
Cyber attacks can impose heavy financial costs on affected entities and disrupt essential services.
For example, a 2023 ransomware attack on a critical Indian defense unit underscored the risks to national security posed by such incidents.
Ransomware Attack on Defence Unit and Surge in Cyber Crimes
A crucial defence unit was affected by a ransomware attack in 2023.
Data Breach and Rising Cybersecurity Threats
In October 2023, Resecurity reported a major data leak at the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), exposing Aadhaar and passport information of 81 crore Indians.
CERT-In documented
15,92,917 cybersecurity incidents in 2023
, including website intrusions, phishing, and data breaches—a significant rise from 53,117 incidents in 2017.
Remedial measures were implemented in collaboration with stakeholders.
Cross-Border Cyber Fraud Investigations and International Collaboration
The CBI partnered with international agencies, including the FBI, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and Singapore police, to dismantle fraud networks operating from India.
Notable cases involved cryptocurrency scams, call centre fraud targeting U.S. and Canadian citizens, and crypto fraud linked to Australian tax evasion.
Cyber Crime Impact on Indian Citizens and Financial Fraud Investigations
The CBI tackled cyber fraud impacting Indian citizens, including app-based investment scams originating in neighboring countries.
An IMPS fraud case initiated by RBI involved ₹820 crore in reversed transactions across banks.
Revised Cybersecurity Oversight and Coordination Roles
In September 2023, the Cabinet Secretariat revised the Allocation of Business Rules.
The National Security Council Secretariat, under NSA Ajit Doval, was assigned to lead cyber security coordination.
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology was designated to secure telecom networks and the Ministry of Home Affairs to handle cybercrimes.
Report Reveals 2023 Ransomware Attack on Key Defence Unit.pdf
( Size:  1.0 MB  )
Click to View More
Defence & Security
**********Costs of population decline
Why in news?
The Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu recently voiced concerns about low fertility rates in their states. Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister announced plans to introduce legislation aimed at incentivizing families to have more children.
This initiative reflects the growing worry over demographic challenges, as both states face declining birth rates that could impact future economic growth and social stability.
What’s in today’s article?
India’s Shifting Demographics: Ageing Population and Fertility Trends
India’s Ageing Crisis and Socio-Economic Challenges
Alternative Approaches to Addressing Low Fertility in Southern States
Impact of Family Planning Success on Ageing Population
Decades of successful family planning policies in India have
resulted in slower population growth but have also led to a rapidly ageing population
, especially in some regions.
The shift poses challenges as the elderly population grows, impacting economic and social systems.
Declining Fertility Rates in Southern and Smaller Northern States
Fertility rates, or the average number of children born to women during child-bearing years, have declined sharply in southern states like Tamil Nadu and West Bengal (1.4 between 2019 and 2021), as well as in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Kerala, Punjab, and Himachal Pradesh (1.5).
States with lower fertility rates typically experienced faster development.
Higher Fertility Rates in Northern States
In contrast, states like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, and Madhya Pradesh still have relatively high fertility rates (3, 2.7, and 2.6, respectively), indicating a slower demographic transition and a younger population structure.
Projected Growth in India’s Elderly Population
According to the India Ageing Report (UNFPA), India’s elderly population is projected to increase from 10.1% in 2021 to 15% by 2036.
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and Andhra Pradesh will see a particularly advanced demographic shift, with elderly populations expected to comprise 22.8%, 20.8%, and 19% of their populations by 2036.
In Bihar, however, the elderly will make up only 11% by 2036.
India’s Ageing Crisis and Socio-Economic Political Challenges
India’s Accelerated Demographic Transition
demographic transition is advancing faster than its socio-economic development
The key measure here is the
old age dependency ratio
, which indicates the number of older dependents for every 100 working-age individuals (18-59 years).
According to Associate Professor Srinivas Goli, an ageing crisis sets in when this ratio exceeds 15%.
States with High Old Age Dependency Ratios
Several states have already crossed this threshold, including Kerala (26.1 in 2021), Tamil Nadu (20.5), Himachal Pradesh (19.6), and Andhra Pradesh (18.5).
This implies that these states’ demographic dividend—the economic benefit from a younger workforce without high dependency—has largely ended, increasing pressures on healthcare and social services.
Healthcare Burden of Ageing Populations
Ageing states face mounting health expenses.
For instance, a 2017-18 study showed that the
southern states, with only 20% of India’s population, accounted for 32% of the country's out-of-pocket spending on cardiovascular diseases
On the other hand,
eight Hindi-belt states, home to 50% of the population, spent only 24%.
Economic and Gender Implications of Increasing Fertility
While some state leaders propose boosting fertility rates to counter ageing, this could reduce women’s participation in the workforce, potentially hindering economic growth.
Southern states also argue that despite their economic contributions and higher tax revenue, they receive a smaller share of central resources due to slower population growth, raising concerns over fiscal fairness.
Impact of Uneven Population Growth on Parliamentary Representation
With the freeze on parliamentary seats expiring in 2026, a new delimitation exercise will adjust Lok Sabha representation based on population shifts, impacting the federal structure.
According to a study, states with higher population growth, like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Rajasthan, are expected to gain seats (12, 10, and 7 respectively).
Meanwhile, states with slower growth, including Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and Andhra Pradesh, are projected to lose seats (9, 6, and 5 respectively) due to their declining share in the national population.
Limitations of Pro-Natalist Incentives
Southern CMs are proposing incentives to encourage higher fertility rates. However, analysts warns that such approaches have seen limited success globally.
Educated women are unlikely to respond to forced fertility incentives
that fail to address real family needs.
Recommended Policy Changes for Sustainable Fertility Rates
Experts advocate for work-family policies that support gender equity, including paid maternity and paternity leave, accessible childcare, and
employment policies that eliminate the “motherhood penalty.”
These changes could help women maintain economic independence, making them more inclined to have children.
Alternative Solutions: Extending Working Lifespan and Migration Policies
Increasing the working lifespan could help reduce the old age dependency ratio.
Southern states, already economic hubs attracting migrants, face challenges as migrants often rely on the social services of destination states.
On the other hand, they are being counted in their home states for political and financial allocations, straining resources in southern states.
A suitable migration policy is needed to address this issue.
Costs of population decline.pdf
( Size:  1.5 MB  )
Click to View More
Social Issues
**********