Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maandhan Yojana (PM-SYM)
The Budget 2025-26 allocation under the PM Shram Yogi Maandhan Yojana increased by 37% compared to last year.
About PM-SYM:
It is a government scheme meant for the
old-age protection
social security of unorganized workers.
Central Sector Scheme
administered by the
Ministry of Labour and Employment
and implemented through
Life Insurance Corporation of India
and CSC eGovernance Services India Limited (CSC SPV).
LIC
is the
Pension Fund Manager
and responsible for pension pay out.
The amount collected under the PM-SYM are invested as per the investment pattern specified by the Government of India.
Eligibility:
Should be an Indian Citizen
Unorganised Workers (working as street vendors, agriculture-related work, construction site workers, workers in industries of leather, handloom, mid-day meal, rickshaw or auto wheelers, rag picking, carpenters, fishermen, etc.
Age group of 18-40 years
Monthly income is below Rs. 15000 and not a member of EPFO/ESIC/NPS (Govt. funded).
Features
voluntary and contributory
pension scheme.
Minimum Assured Pension:
Each subscriber under the PM-SYM shall receive minimum assured pension of
Rs 3000/- per month after
attaining the
age of 60
Contribution by the Subscriber:
The subscriber’s contributions to PM-SYM shall be made through
‘auto-debit’ facility
from his/ her savings bank account/Jan- Dhan account.
The subscriber is required to
contribute the prescribed contribution amount
from the age of joining PM-SYM
till the age of 60 years.
Matching contribution by the Central Government:
It is a pension scheme on a 50:50 basis where prescribed age-specific contributions shall be made by the beneficiary and the matching contribution by the Central Government.
Family Pension:
During the receipt of pension, if the subscriber dies, the spouse of the beneficiary shall be entitled to receive 50% of the pension received by the beneficiary as a family pension. Family pension is applicable
only to spouse.
If a beneficiary has given regular contributions and died
due to any cause (before age 60 years), his/her
spouse will be entitled to join and continue the scheme
subsequently by payment of regular contributions
or exit the scheme
as per provisions of exit and withdrawal.
Exit
Even if the subscriber wants to opt out of the scheme
before 10 years,
share of the subscriber will be given back along with the interest
amount accrued.
If the subscriber
opts out after 10 years
but before 60 years of age, the
contribution,
adding the accumulated interest
will be given back to the candidate.
Click to View More
Source :
‘Budget focus firmly on employment generation’
Polity & Governance
**********Iran’s New Missiles
Iran recently unveiled two missiles, named Etemad and Ghadr-380.
About Etemad Missile:
It is a new
ballistic missile
built by the
Iranian
Defence Ministry.
Dubbed Etemad, or "trust" in Persian, it has a maximum range of
1,700 kilometres
With a length of 16 meters and a diameter of 1.25 meters, the missile is equipped with a
precision-guided warhead.
About Ghadr-380:
It is an
anti-warship cruise missile
developed by
It has a range of over
1,000 kilometers
anti-jamming capability
Ballistic Missile vs. Cruise Missile:
Ballistic missiles
are
powered initially by a rocket
or series of rockets in stages, but then follow an unpowered
projectile trajectory
that
arches upwards before descending
to reach its intended target.
Ballistic missiles can carry both
nuclear and conventional
Cruise missiles
propelled by jet engines,
much like an airplane. They are
self-propelled
for the majority of their time in the air, flying in a
relatively straight line and at lower altitudes
, as low as a few meters off the ground.
Flying low to the surface of the earth, they
use more fuel but
they are
very difficult to detect.
Click to View More
Source :
Iran's New Etemad & Ghadr-380 Missiles Send Shockwaves In U.S. & Israel | 'Hell For Enemy Warships'
Science & Tech
**********Henipavirus
Camp Hill virus, a henipavirus related to Nipah, has been recently detected in North America, raising concerns of a potential outbreak.
About Henipavirus:
Henipaviruses (family Paramyxoviridae) are
zoonotic
, negative-sense
RNA viruses.
Fruit bats
(Pteropus species, also called ‘
flying foxes
’) are the
natural hosts
of Henipaviruses.
Henipaviruses can cross species barriers,
infecting various mammals, including humans.
They often
cause severe respiratory illness
and
encephalitis
and are associated with
high case fatality rates.
The two
most notable henipaviruses are Hendra virus and Nipah virus
Hendra virus,
first identified in Australia, has caused outbreaks with
mortality rates up to 70%.
has been linked with numerous outbreaks in
Southeast Asia,
particularly in Malaysia and Bangladesh, with case-
estimated at
40%–75% d
epending on surveillance and clinical management.
Transmission
Direct contact
with infected animals (e.g., bats, horses, pigs).
Consumption of contaminated food or water.
Human-to-human transmission through bodily fluids,
close contact, or
respiratory droplets.
Symptoms
Common symptoms include
dizziness, headache, fever,
and myalgias.
Fatality often occurs when the disease
progresses to severe encephalitis
and symptoms like
confusion, abnormal reflexes, seizures, and coma occur.
Why are henipaviruses so deadly?
It lies in their
ability to encode several proteins
which
block the innate immune response
in infected animals and humans.
These inhibit the cell’s response to viral infection, and allow viral replication.
Treatment
: Treatment is symptomatic, and
no vaccine or antiviral drug
has been developed so far to treat the disease.
Click to View More
Source :
Camp Hill Virus, Close Relative Of Nipah, Discovered In Alabama Shrews In US Sparking Pandemic Concerns
Science & Tech
**********Small Modular Reactors (SMRs)
The Finance Minister recently announced a ₹20,000 crore ‘Nuclear Energy Mission’ to develop indigenous Small Modular Reactors (SMR).
About Small Modular Reactors (SMRs):
SMRs are defined as
small nuclear reactors
with a
maximum output of 300 Megawatt
electric (MWe) and which can produce 7.2 million kWh per day.
By comparison,
large-size nuclear power plants
have an
output of over 1,000 MWe
and can produce 24 million kWh per day.
SMRs, which can produce a large amount of low-carbon electricity, are:
– physically a fraction of the size of a conventional nuclear power reactor.
– making it possible for systems and
components to be factory-assembled and transported
as a unit to a location for installation.
– harnessing
nuclear fission
to generate heat to produce energy.
Advantages:
Relatively
small physical footprints
;
Reduced capital investment;
Can be
factory-built,
unlike the conventional nuclear reactors that are built on-site;
Ability to be sited in remote locations, not possible for larger nuclear plants;
Provisions for incremental power additions
Power plants based on SMRs may require
less frequent refueling
, every 3 to 7 years, in comparison to between 1 and 2 years for conventional plants.
Some SMRs are designed to operate for up to 30 years without refueling.
It also offers distinct safeguards,
security and non-proliferation advantages
They are well
suited to be integrated into energy hubs
in combination
with other sources of energy.
They are adapted to
supply electricity
additionally capable of supplying heat
for industrial applications, district heating, as well as for the production of hydrogen.
Click to View More
Source :
Union Budget 2025: Reactor plan not enriched with funds
Science & Tech
**********Deepor Beel
The recently conducted third annual Deepor Beel Winter Birding Festival 2025 saw an increase in the number of both migratory and residential birds compared to the count done in 2024.
About Deepor Beel:
It is a perennial
freshwater lake
located on the outskirts of
Guwahati
, in the
Kamrup district of Assam
It lies in a
former channel of the Brahmaputra
It covers an area of 4.1
sq.km
It is the only major stormwater storage basin for the city of Guwahati.
The lake's
outflow is the Khandajan rivulet,
which
joins the Brahmaputra.
It was recognised as a
Ramsar Site
in 2002 and as an
Important Bird and Biodiversity Area
(IBA) in 2004. It is the
only Ramsar site in
This lake is a
staging site on migratory flyways,
and some of the
largest concentrations of aquatic birds
in Assam can be seen, especially in winter.
Some
globally threatened birds
are supported,
including Spot-billed Pelican, Lesser Greater Adjutant Stork, and Baer's Pochard.
About 50 fish species and aquatic resources provide livelihood support to about 1,200 households residing in about 12 villages on the fringes of the wetland.
Rani and Garbhanga hills,
habitat of the Asiatic elephants
southern side of the beel,
are part of this ecosystem.
Click to View More
Source :
Bird fest see rise in migratory & residential birds
Environment
**********SwaRail Application
Recently, the Ministry of Railways has introduced the SuperApp ‘SwaRail’, a one-stop solution for seamless railway services.
About SwaRail:
It
integrates various railway services
, eliminating the need for multiple applications and reducing space consumption on user devices.
A key focus of the App is enhancing user experience with a seamless and clean
user interface (UI).
The App caters to a wide range of user needs, including:
Reserved and Unreserved ticket bookings
Parcel and Freight Enquiries
Train and PNR status enquiries
Food Orders on Trains
Rail Madad for Complaint Management, etc.
It has been developed by the
Centre for Railway Information Systems
CRIS
Centre for Railway Information Systems:
It is an organization under Ministry of Railways.
It is a unique combination of competent IT professionals and experienced Railway personnel enabling it to successfully deliver complex Railway IT systems in core areas.
develops and maintains software
for the key functional areas of the Indian Railways.
Click to View More
Source :
Indian Railways Launches ‘SwaRail’ SuperApp for Beta Testing – Final Public Launch after Trials: A One-Stop Solution for Seamless Railway Services
Economy
**********Very Short-Range Air Defence System (VSHORADS)
Recently, the Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO) has successfully conducted three successive flight-trials of Very Short-Range Air Defence System (VSHORADS) from Chandipur off the coast of Odisha.
About VSHORADS:
It is a
Man Portable Air Defence system.
Features:
short-range, lightweight
and portable
surface-to-air missiles
that can be fired by individuals or small groups to destroy aircraft or helicopters.
Range:
They are having a
maximum range of
8 kilometres
and can engage targets at
altitudes of 4.5 km
The missile incorporates many novel technologies including a miniaturized
Reaction Control System
(RCS) and
integrated avionics
, which have been successfully proven during the tests.
The RCS is responsible for attitude control and steering by the use of thrusters and is also capable of providing small amounts of thrust in any desired direction or combination of directions.
It is designed and developed indigenously by the Research Center Imarat in collaboration with other
DRDO laboratories
and Development cum Production Partners.
The missile system has the capability to meet the needs of
all the three branches of the Armed Forces
, viz. Indian Army, Navy and Air Force.
Click to View More
Source :
DRDO successfully conducts successive flight-trials of Very Short-Range Air Defence System off the Odisha coast
Science & Tech
**********World Wetlands Day
Recently, the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) organised the World Wetlands Day 2025 celebrations at the Parvati Arga Ramsar Site.
About World Wetlands Day:
It is
celebrated annually on February 2.
This date marks the
adoption of the Ramsar Convention
in 1971.
It aims to spread awareness about conserving the wetlands, one of the most critical ecosystems on the planet.
This year, the theme was “
Protecting Wetlands for Our Common Future
”.
India
has been a
party
to the Convention since 1982, designating
89 Ramsar sites.
What are wetlands?
Wetlands are regions covered by water either
perennially or seasonally,
such as marshes and lakes.
Significance of Wetlands:
They are vital
reservoirs of biodiversity
aid water conservation
provide habitat
for numerous migratory birds, aquatic species, and plant life. They also help
recharge groundwater, control floods and support fisheries and local communities
From the point of view of
climate change mitigation,
wetlands are
important carbon sinks,
meaning they absorb more carbon from the atmosphere
The major threats to wetlands, in general, are
due to man-made factors
, leading to habitat degradation and declining biodiversity.
Click to View More
Source :
World Wetlands Day 2025, themed ‘Protecting Wetlands for our Common Future’, celebrated at Parvati Arga Ramsar Site, in Gonda, Uttar Pradesh
**********RBI's Digital Payments Index
The Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) digital payments index (DPI) rose to 465.33 as of September 2024, compared to 445.5 in March 2024, reflecting the rapid adoption of digital payments in the country.
About RBI's Digital Payments Index:
It is a first-of-its kind index to measure the spread of digital payments across the country. It has been
constructed by the RBI
It was launched in
January 2021.
Base Year:
It has been constructed
with March 2018
as the base period, i.e., the DPI score for March 2018 is
set at 100.
The DPI index comprises
five broad parameters
that enable the measurement of deepening and penetration of digital payments in the country over different time periods. The parameters include:
Payment enablers
(25 percent weightage in the index)
Payment Infrastructure Demand-side factors
(10 percent)
Payment Infrastructure Supply-side factors
(15 per cent)
Payment performance
(45 percent)
Consumer centricity (
Each of the parameters has sub-parameters, which, in turn, consist of various measurable indicators.
Click to View More
Source :
RBI's digital payments index rises to 465.33 as of September 2024
Economy
**********Golden-headed Cisticola
Recently, Golden-headed Cisticola bird was discovered for the first time in the Mathikettan Shola National Park, Idukki in the southern Western Ghats after an extensive gap.
About Golden-headed Cisticola:
Scientific Name:
Cisticola exilis
It is also known as the
bright-capped cisticola
. It is a species of warbler in the family Cisticolidae.
omnivorous
, primarily eating invertebrates such as insects and small slugs, but also eating grass seeds.
Habitat:
It is usually found in
grasslands
in the mountain ranges.
Distribution:
It is found in
Australia and Asian countries
. In India it has been observed in parts of
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and northern Kerala.
Appearance:
Male birds have distinct
golden-orange plumage
on their head, neck, and chest during breeding. They also have pinkish beaks and black streaks on their backs. They can be easily identified by their distinctive call.
Conservation Status:
IUCN:
Least Concern
Mathikettan Shola National Park:
It is located in the southern part of the Palakkad Gap in the
Western Ghats of Kerala.
Vegetation:
It houses
evergreen forests, moist deciduous forests
, shola grasslands and semi-evergreens.
Three streams namely Uchillkuthi Puzha, Mathikettan Puzha, and Njandar being the
tributaries of Panniyar,
originate from the hill ranges of Mathikettan.
Highest Point: Kattumala
is located in the eastern border of the park
adjoining Tamil Nadu.
Muthavan tribes are
situated about the northeastern borders of Mathikettan Shola.
Click to View More
Source :
Golden-headed Cisticola found in Mathikettan Shola National Park
Environment
**********FIDE and freestyle chess organisers may end their feud soon
Why in news?
The feud between Freestyle Chess Grand Slam Tour organisers and FIDE is nearing resolution. Recent direct talks between Jan Henric Buettner and FIDE President Arkady Dvorkovich mark progress after months of tension.
The dispute, involving top players like Magnus Carlsen and Hikaru Nakamura, began nearly two months ago.
What’s in today’s article:
Types of Chess World Championships
The Feud Between FIDE and Freestyle Chess Organisers
The International Chess Federation (FIDE) is the governing body of the sport of chess, and it regulates all international chess competitions.
Constituted as a non-governmental institution, it was recognized by the International Olympic Committee as a Global Sporting Organization in 1999.
Activities of FIDE
Publishes monthly rankings for the top 100 players, women, juniors, and girls
Publishes rankings for countries based on the average rating of their top 10 players and top 10 female players
Regulates all international chess competitions
Connects national chess federations
FIDE's history
Founded in Paris, France in 1924
Headquarters
are in Lausanne
FIDE's motto
Gens una sumus, which is Latin for "We are one Family"
Freestyle chess, popularised by Bobby Fischer in 1996, is a variant of chess that introduces a randomised starting position for back-rank pieces while keeping pawns in their usual places.
Key Features and Purpose
This format eliminates opening theory, forcing players to rely on creativity and original thinking rather than pre-prepared moves.
There are 960 possible starting positions, making each game unique.
Movement and Rules
Despite the shuffled setup, all pieces retain their standard movement rules—rooks move straight, bishops diagonally, and knights retain their ability to jump.
Alternate Names
Freestyle chess is also known as Fischer Random Chess, Chess 9LX, and Chess 960.
The Freestyle Chess Grand Slam Tour is a five-event chess series launched by German entrepreneur Jan Henric Buettner.
The tournaments will take place in 2025 across Weissenhaus, Paris, New York, New Delhi, and Cape Town.
Time Control and Format
Unlike rapid or blitz formats, the tour will follow classical time controls—90 minutes for the first 40 moves, 30 minutes for the rest of the game, and a 30-second increment per move.
FIDE currently organises several
world championship events
across different formats:
Classical World Championship
– The premier event, where Gukesh defeated Ding Liren.
Women’s World Championship
– Specifically for female players.
World Rapid Championship
– For faster time controls.
World Blitz Championship
– For the fastest format, with even shorter time controls.
Additionally, FIDE previously organised a
Freestyle/Chess960 World Championship
until 2022 but had to discontinue it due to a
lack of sponsorship
The dispute centers around the use of the term
“world championship.”
FIDE claims that, as the global governing body of chess, only it can sanction an event as a world championship.
The organisers of the
challenge this assertion.
Financial Disagreement
The freestyle event's organiser claimed that they offered FIDE $100,000 as a goodwill gesture to avoid conflicts.
However, FIDE allegedly rejected this and instead demanded $500,000.
They later stated they were willing to contribute $50,000 annually to prevent interference from FIDE.
FIDE’s Stance
FIDE emphasized that world championships are a key revenue source for FIDE, funding grassroots chess programs.
Allowing an unsanctioned event to use the title “world championship” could undermine this system.
Contractual Restrictions on Players
FIDE contracts for major events like the Candidates Tournament and World Chess Championship include a clause barring players from competing in non-FIDE-approved world championships.
As the 2025-26 FIDE World Championship cycle begins, players will need to sign agreements ensuring they do not participate in alternative world championships—except for the
Freestyle Tour in 2025
Violation could result in exclusion from
two consecutive FIDE World Championship cycles
FIDE and freestyle chess organisers may end their feud soon.pdf
( Size:  3.6 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Trump puts tariffs on Canada, Mexico and China
Why in news?
On February 1, 2025, U.S. President Donald Trump signed an order imposing heavy tariffs on imports from Mexico, Canada, and China, triggering swift retaliation and straining ties with North American allies.
He justified the move as necessary to protect Americans, citing concerns over illicit fentanyl production and illegal immigration.
What’s in today’s article?
Imposition of tariffs by President Trump
Retaliation from Canada, Mexico and China
Possible impact of tariffs imposed by President Trump
India is exempted from Trump’s tariff volleys for now
Conclusion
U.S. President Donald Trump signed an order imposing tariffs of 10% on all imports from China and 25% on imports from Canada and Mexico, citing economic and national security concerns.
Energy imports from Canada, including oil and natural gas, would be taxed at 10%.
The move aims to curb illegal immigration and fentanyl exports but has triggered swift retaliation.
Retaliation from Canada and Mexico
Canada, Mexico and China have vowed to respond to sweeping new tariffs to their exports to the US announced by President Donald Trump.
Response by Canada
Canada responded with 25% tariffs on $155 billion worth of U.S. imports, including alcohol and fruit.
Response by Mexico
Mexico’s President Claudia Sheinbaum rejected Trump’s claims about Mexican government ties to criminal organizations and announced retaliatory tariffs.
She also instructed her economy secretary to implement further countermeasures.
China’s Tough Choice: Retaliate or Hold Back
China faces a difficult decision—responding aggressively could escalate a global trade war, while inaction might make it appear weak domestically.
The country’s economy heavily depends on exports, making trade disruptions a major concern.
The Ministry of Commerce announced it would challenge Trump’s tariffs at the World Trade Organization (WTO).
However, the WTO’s power has weakened due to the U.S. blocking judge appointments.
China also urged the U.S. to enhance cooperation rather than escalate tensions.
Economic Risks and Inflation Concerns
Economists warn that the tariffs could worsen inflation, leading to higher prices for groceries, autos, and housing, potentially undermining Trump’s promise to lower costs.
A study from Yale’s Budget Lab estimates the average U.S. household could lose $1,170 in income.
Escalation of Protectionist Policies
Trump signaled plans for additional tariffs on computer chips, steel, oil, gas, pharmaceuticals, and European imports.
This could lead to broader economic conflicts between the U.S. and major global economies.
Impact on Jobs
Despite claims of protecting US jobs, Trump’s tariffs had no substantial positive effect on employment in protected industries like steel.
Automation and higher input costs might hurt other sectors.
While some support tariffs for national security, most economists argue they fail to boost employment or reduce the trade deficit.
Despite Trump’s frequent criticism of India’s tariffs, the country was not included in the first round of US trade restrictions.
India, however, has proactively reduced tariffs on US exports, including motorcycles, satellite ground installations, and synthetic flavouring essences, as announced in the Union Budget 2025-26.
India’s Position in the US Trade Deficit
India is the
ninth-largest
contributor to the US trade deficit, accounting for
3.2%
of the total.
The largest contributors are:
: 30% ($317 billion surplus);
: 19% ($200 billion surplus);
: 14.5% ($153 billion surplus).
Opportunities for India in the US Market
With US tariffs making Chinese goods more expensive, Indian exporters see an opportunity to gain market share.
Experts noted that trade diversions in Trump’s first term already benefited India, and the new tariffs could further enhance its position.
Potential Sectors at Risk for India
Although India is not an immediate target, US trade restrictions may focus on high-value Indian exports, including:
Pharmaceuticals
(21.9% of India’s consumer goods exports to the US).
Gems & Jewellery
(9.6%).
Fisheries (shrimps & prawns)
(6.6%).
Other sectors that may come under scrutiny include
chemical products, textiles, and wood pulp.
Trump’s aggressive trade policies have set off a high-stakes economic confrontation, with potential global repercussions.
As tariffs take effect, inflation, economic disruption, and strained international relations are likely to dominate Trump’s second term.
Trump puts tariffs on Canada, Mexico and China.pdf
( Size:  306.3 KB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********India-US Ties: Immigration Policy and Diplomatic Challenges
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background (Context of the Article)
US Immigration Policy (Trump’s Crackdown, H-1B Visas & Skilled Immigration, etc.)
Background:
The
India-US relationship
is witnessing a renewed diplomatic push as
illegal immigration
emerges as a critical issue.
The Indian government has agreed to
accept the return of its citizens who entered the US illegally
, in a move aimed at
maintaining favourable legal immigration policies
for Indian nationals.
The agreement aligns with
President Donald Trump’s immigration crackdown
, which aims to deport a
million undocumented migrants annually
Amid the
strict US immigration policies
, India’s diplomatic efforts remain focused on
ensuring smooth visa processes for students, professionals, and legal travellers
while navigating the complexities of deportation.
India’s Diplomatic Strategy on Immigration:
Accepting Deportations to Preserve Legal Channels:
Indian government has assured US officials
that it will take back its citizens who entered the US illegally.
India’s priority:
Ensuring that the mass deportation drive does not affect the
legal pathways
for Indian professionals, students, and tourists.
In 2024, the
US deported only about 1,100 Indians
, but under Trump’s latest
, an estimated
20,000 Indians
could face deportation.
US-India Diplomatic Engagements:
External Affairs Minister
S. Jaishankar
has held multiple high-level meetings.
These engagements reflect
India’s proactive diplomacy
in managing the immigration issue
without straining bilateral ties
Trump’s Immigration Crackdown and its Impact:
US Deportation Targets and Challenges:
Trump’s administration
one million illegal immigrants annually
, requiring a daily deportation of
2,750 individuals
ICE (Immigration and Customs Enforcement)
faces logistical challenges, including
limited detention capacity
(40,000 beds) and transportation constraints.
Guantanamo Bay detention facility
is being considered for holding up to
30,000 detainees
, signalling a more aggressive approach.
The Larger Indian Immigrant Population:
While
20,000 Indian nationals
are currently facing deportation, an estimated
7,25,000 undocumented Indians
reside in the US.
Workplace and home raids
by ICE have heightened concerns, leading to
labor shortages in low-wage sectors
as undocumented workers avoid public spaces.
H-1B Visas and Skilled Immigration: India’s Primary Concern
bigger concern
lies in ensuring that
skilled professionals and students
continue to have opportunities in the US.
Indian Presence in the US Workforce and Education
H-1B Work Visas:
72% of all H-1B visas
issued between
October 2022 - September 2023
went to
Major IT firms such as
Infosys, TCS, HCL, and Wipro
collectively obtained
20,000+ H-1B approvals
for their employees.
Indian Students in the US:
As of
May 2024
3,51,000 Indian students
were enrolled in US institutions, primarily in
STEM graduate programs
Indian students significantly
contribute to the US economy
, making their continued
visa approvals a priority for both nations
Trump’s Stance on H-1B Visas:
Unlike his
harsh stance on illegal immigration
, Trump has expressed support for the
H-1B program
, calling it crucial for bringing
“competent and skilled professionals”
to the US.
Indian government continues to push for streamlined visa processing
for both students and skilled workers.
Balancing Immigration Policy with Bilateral Ties:
India’s Concerns:
India has
urged the US
to handle deportations
discreetly
, as mass deportation events could create
political backlash
in India.
US issued over one million visas
to Indian nationals, including a record number of
tourist and business visas
India wants to
prevent any visa restrictions
due to the crackdown on illegal immigration.
The US Perspective:
Trump’s focus on
is a core part of his
MAGA campaign strategy
The US government expects
cooperation from key partners like India
in enforcing deportation policies.
Despite the
crackdown on undocumented workers
, the US acknowledges that
legal Indian immigrants contribute significantly
to the economy.
Conclusion:
India-US immigration issue
is a test of diplomatic balance. While India
cooperates on deportations
, it remains focused on
protecting the rights and opportunities of legal travelers, students, and skilled professionals
With
Trump's aggressive immigration policies
, India continues to engage in
strategic diplomacy
, ensuring that
bilateral ties remain strong while managing evolving immigration challenges
Immigration Policy and Diplomatic Challenges.pdf
( Size:  470.6 KB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********A Budget That is Forward-Looking and Growth-Oriented
Context
The
Union Budget 2025-26 is a continuation of the Indian government’s sustained efforts
to strengthen economic growth and development.
Through strategic measures
such as income tax cuts, increased capital expenditure, and a focus on manufacturing and labour-intensive sectors
, the budget aims to stimulate economic activity, generate employment, and enhance ease of doing business.
While its full impact will unfold over time,
the budget’s framework suggests a proactive, forward-looking approach to national economic planning.
Union Budget FY26 Notable Announcements
IT Cuts and Its Multiplier Effects
One of the most notable announcements in the budget is
the reduction in personal income tax, which provides complete exemption for individuals earning up to ₹12 lakh annually,
with an additional benefit for salaried taxpayers due to the standard deduction.
This is a
significant relief for the middle class
and is expected to create a multiplier effect on the economy.
Higher disposable income will likely increase consumer spending
, leading to greater demand across various industries such as retail, real estate, and automobiles.
This surge in consumption will, in turn, boost business performance,
create employment opportunities, and increase indirect tax collections, further strengthening economic expansion.
Capital Expenditure and Infrastructure Development
Another crucial aspect of the budget is the
allocation of ₹11.2 lakh crore for capital expenditure,
reflecting a nearly 10% increase from the previous year.
investment is expected to accelerate infrastructure development
, creating employment and strengthening the country’s logistical and industrial foundations.
Enhanced infrastructure will improve transportation efficiency
, reduce business costs, and attract private investment, contributing to sustainable economic growth.
Manufacturing and the National Manufacturing Mission
significant push has been given to the manufacturing sector
through the launch of the
National Manufacturing Mission.
This initiative
aligns with the ‘Make in India’ campaign and aims to support small, medium, and large industries
by offering policy support, execution roadmaps, and governance frameworks in collaboration with central ministries and state governments.
By reducing import dependency and encouraging foreign investment,
this mission could establish India as a global manufacturing hub.
initiative’s success will depend on the effectiveness of its regulatory reforms
, incentives, and implementation strategies.
Targeted Initiatives for Key Sectors
Focus on Labor-Intensive Sectors
Recognising the importance of employment generation,
the budget prioritises labour-intensive industries such as tourism, food processing, and leather.
These sectors have historically been major contributors
to both
employment and export earnings.
By offering targeted incentives and streamlining regulations, the government aims to enhance productivity and global competitiveness while creating new job opportunities.
Focus on Maritime and Aviation Sector
Additionally,
the maritime sector has been given a boost through the establishment of a Maritime Development Fund
, which is expected to benefit coastal states and support the growth of the marine economy.
expansion of flight connectivity to 120 new destinations under the modified UDAN scheme is another significant measure
that will help unlock economic opportunities in previously underserved regions, focusing regional development.
Agricultural Reforms and Rural Development
The budget introduces the
Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana
, a targeted initiative designed to improve agricultural productivity and rural livelihoods.
Covering 100 districts with low productivity and limited credit access, this scheme will focus on crop diversification
, post-harvest infrastructure, irrigation improvements, and credit facilitation.
With an estimated 1.7 crore farmer-beneficiaries,
this initiative has the potential to transform India’s agricultural sector by increasing rural incomes
and driving economic activity in the hinterlands.
A rise in rural purchasing power will indirectly benefit industries
related to consumer goods and agricultural supply chains.
The Strategic Announcements of FY26 Budget
Fiscal Prudence and Economic Stability
A commendable aspect of the budget is the
government’s commitment to reducing the fiscal deficit from 4.8% in 2024-25 to 4.4% in 2025-26.
lower fiscal deficit is crucial for maintaining macroeconomic stability,
controlling inflation, and enhancing investor confidence.
By maintaining fiscal discipline,
the government is ensuring a strong foundation for long-term economic sustainability.
Ease of Doing Business and Trade Competitiveness
emphasises improving the ease of doing business
by rationalising the duty structure and simplifying the tariff framework.
removal of additional tariff rates and the limitation of cess or surcharges to a single instance per product
are steps toward creating a more predictable taxation system.
addressing the inverted duty structure for certain products is expected to enhance trade competitiveness
and encourage greater participation of domestic firms in global supply chains.
Conclusion
Union Budget 2025-26 presents a well-structured approach to economic growth by focusing on capital expenditure, manufacturing,
labour-intensive industries, and rural development, while maintaining fiscal prudence.
significant tax relief for the middle class
, infrastructure investments, and business-friendly policies
set the stage for robust economic progress.
While the success of various initiatives will depend on their implementation,
the overall direction of the budget signals a strategic and growth-oriented vision for India’s future.
Click to View More
Editorial Analysis
**********Beyond Tax Cuts, A Closer Read of the Union Budget
Context
The Union Budget 2025-26 presented by the finance minister
comes at a time of significant macroeconomic challenges.
While the
Budget lays out an ambitious roadmap for Viksit Bharat (Developed India), encompassing key sectors
such as agriculture, manufacturing, MSMEs, social welfare, and infrastructure,
its execution remains a critical concern.
Therefore,
it is crucial to examine the fiscal consolidation strategy, tax revisions, manufacturing incentives, agricultural initiatives, external sector policies
, and climate commitments outlined in the Budget, highlighting
both its strengths and limitations.
A Critical Evaluation of Key Budget Announcements
Fiscal Consolidation: A Questionable Target
A key highlight of the Budget is the fiscal consolidation target of
reducing the fiscal deficit to 4.4% of GDP by FY26.
However,
this ambitious goal relies on overly optimistic revenue projections
, including an 11.2% increase in total tax revenues and a 14.4% rise in income tax revenues.
Given the economic headwinds, such as declining domestic consumption and weakening external demand,
these estimates appear questionable.
Additionally,
the success of the second asset monetisation plan (2025-30) remains uncertain
, considering the underperformance of the previous program.
estimated ₹11.54 lakh crore in net market borrowings further raises concerns about potential crowding
out of private investment at a time when credit demand is already subdued.
Achieving these revenue targets will require improved tax collection efficiency,
realistic monetization strategies, and disciplined fiscal management.
Tax Revisions: Boosting Disposable Income but at a Cost
revisions in personal income tax rates under the new tax regime offer relief to middle-income taxpayers
, with incomes up to ₹12 lakh effectively exempt from tax.
While this measure may enhance disposable income and consumer spending,
it comes at a significant cost—₹1 lakh crore in foregone direct tax revenue.
This
loss could constrain the government’s ability to fund critical development initiatives,
particularly when public investment in infrastructure and social welfare remains vital.
Moreover,
the tax cuts come at a time when household savings have declined to 18.4% of GDP,
raising concerns about their long-term sustainability.
challenge lies in balancing immediate fiscal stimulus with the need for long-term economic resilience.
Manufacturing Sector: Progress, but Gaps Remain
Budget reaffirms India’s ambition to become a global manufacturing hub
concerns persist regarding the sector's underperformance,
which contributes only 17% of GDP.
production-linked incentives (PLIs) have had moderate success in certain industries
like electronics,
their scalability and effectiveness remain uncertain.
Positive measures such as enhanced credit facilities for MSMEs, a National Manufacturing Mission, and revised MSME classification criteria may improve business efficiency.
deeper structural issues
, such as regulatory inefficiencies, infrastructure deficits, and weak innovation capacity,
remain unaddressed.
India’s industrial R&D investment stands at a mere 0.64% of GDP
, significantly lagging behind innovation-driven economies like China and Germany.
Without sustained investment in research
, infrastructure, and regulatory reforms,
India's manufacturing ambitions may fall short of expectations.
Some Other Key Themes of the Budget and Remaining Gaps
Agriculture: A Strategic Shift but Missed Opportunities
Recognising agriculture as a key economic pillar,
the Budget introduces initiatives such as the Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana
and the National Mission on High-Yielding Seeds to enhance productivity and climate resilience.
increase in Kisan Credit Card (KCC) loan limits from ₹3 lakh to ₹5 lakh and targeted interventions in low-productivity districts signal a move towards precision support
rather than blanket subsidies.
these measures do not fully address systemic inefficiencies
in agricultural markets.
focus on short-term credit enhancements perpetuates farmers’ dependence on loans
without tackling issues like price volatility and market access.
the Budget misses an opportunity to promote agricultural exports, particularly in emerging sectors like millets and organic farming
, which could have positioned India as a global leader.
External Sector: Inadequate Response to Global Challenges
external sector policies receive limited attention
in the Budget despite growing trade deficits and currency depreciation challenges.
While services exports, particularly in IT and business process outsourcing, continue to perform well,
efforts to diversify the
export portfolio remain insufficient.
Initiatives like
Bharat Trade Net (BTN) and export credit support for MSMEs are positive steps but lack the scale necessary to address India’s persistent trade imbalances.
the Budget fails to introduce a comprehensive export strategy for high-value sectors such as pharmaceuticals, renewable energy
, and advanced electronics, which are crucial for integrating India into global supply chains.
A more aggressive push in these areas could have enhanced export competitiveness
and strengthened India's economic resilience.
Climate Commitments: Incremental Rather Than Transformative
While the Budget signals intent on climate action,
its financial commitments remain cautious.
Key measures include incentives for lithium-ion battery recycling, duty exemptions on critical minerals,
and support for domestic solar and battery manufacturing.
These steps
aim to reduce import dependence and strengthen supply-chain resilience.
without parallel investments
in grid modernisation, energy storage, and industrial decarbonisation,
India's transition to a low-carbon economy will remain fragmented.
A more transformative push
, such as higher budgetary allocations for renewable infrastructure and carbon capture technologies,
would have accelerated progress towards sustainable growth.
Conclusion
The Union Budget presents a vision for economic growth, fiscal discipline, and structural reform
s but falls short in execution strategies.
While measures such as tax cuts, MSME support, agricultural reforms, and climate initiatives reflect positive intent,
concerns remain over their sustainability and effectiveness.
fiscal consolidation target appears ambitious
, and the reliance on optimistic revenue projections raises
questions about its feasibility.
Ultimately,
the success of this Budget will depend on the government's ability to implement its policies effectively
while maintaining economic stability.
Click to View More
Editorial Analysis
**********A Step Towards Justice - The Need for a Law on Domestic Workers
Context:
The Supreme Court’s directive
to the Union government on January 29
to explore the feasibility of a separate law for domestic workers
is a significant step toward recognizing their rights.
The Court has ordered the Centre
to form an inter-ministerial committee
to examine the necessity of a legal framework for domestic workers’ protection, regulation, and welfare.
The Vulnerability of Domestic Workers:
Domestic workers (such as those involved in the cleaning tasks and cooking or care work) remain
outside the purview of key labour laws
such as the Minimum Wages Act and the Equal Remuneration Act.
The Court noted that while some states have regulations,
a uniform national law is missing
This workforce is primarily composed of
marginalized communities and migrant workers
, making them even more vulnerable.
Challenges Faced by Domestic Workers:
Low wages and exploitative conditions:
Wages vary widely, even within the same locality.
Workers are often forced to take on additional tasks without extra compensation.
There is a
lack of job security and social security benefits
Social invisibility and discrimination:
Domestic work is often
undervalued
due to gendered perceptions.
Many workers face
harassment and humiliation
from employers.
Abuse cases rarely get media attention and remain unaddressed.
Existing gaps in legal framework:
India has
yet to ratify
the International Labor Organization
(ILO) Convention 189
on domestic workers.
The judiciary has previously directed the registration of placement agencies, but these efforts have had little impact.
The 2019 Code on Wages includes domestic workers, but
variations in employment structures (part-time/full-time, live-in/live-out) create complexities
Key Considerations for a New Law:
Clear definition and employment proof:
An inclusive definition of domestic work is necessary for effective regulation.
Proof of employment is a critical prerequisite for enforcing labour laws.
Workers' unions have demanded
mandatory employer registration
to address this issue.
Employer resistance and workplace recognition:
Resistance by employers needs to be taken into account. Many employers do not consider themselves as such, nor do they view their homes as workplaces.
Any new legislation should
ensure minimum entitlements and grievance redressal mechanisms.
Recognise local aspirations:
Though domestic work shows similar structural characteristics and features across the world, it is important to take note of regional and local specifics while formulating laws.
Way Forward:
The Supreme Court’s directive presents
an opportunity to push for a national law,
which would help redefine power dynamics and give domestic workers a stronger voice.
Regional efforts, such as those in
Kerala and Delhi
, should be examined. In Kerala, domestic workers are primarily protected under the "
Kerala Domestic Workers (Regulation and Welfare) Act, 2021
", which
Outlines their
Rights to minimum wages,
Dignified working conditions, written contracts, and
Protection against exploitation, including provisions for regulating employment agencies placing domestic workers with employers.
Stipulates regarding
working hours, rest days, and mandatory social security benefits.
The concerns of the domestic workers’ unions
must be taken into account while framing any law.
The effectiveness of any law will depend on the recommendations of the committee and the
Union government’s commitment to implementation
Conclusion:
A separate legal framework for domestic workers would mark
a major step toward ensuring dignity, fair wages, and protection from exploitation
While immediate transformation may be challenging, such a law would serve as
a foundation for long-term improvements
in their working conditions and social status.
Click to View More
Editorial Analysis
**********[3rd February 2025] The Hindu Op-ed: Beyond tax cuts, a closer read of the Union Budget
Economics
PYQ Relevance:
) One of the intended objectives of Union-Budget 15-18 is to ‘transform, energize and clean India’. Analyze the measures proposed in the Budget 15-18 to achieve the objective.
(UPSC CSE 2017)
Q)
Distinguish between Capital Budget and Revenue Budget. Explain the components of both these Budgets.
(UPSC CSE 2021)
Mentor’s Comment:
UPSC mains have always focused on
Sustainable Development (2016, 2017, 2018 and 2022),
Budget Initiatives (2017 and 2021).
Union Budget 2024-25
presents a strategic framework aimed at fostering economic growth while addressing the needs of various sectors, particularly the middle class, agriculture, and employment. While efforts to streamline tax structures and reduce compliance burdens are positive, they must be accompanied by
robust strategies to ensure sustainable growth
and equitable distribution of resources.
The editorial emphasizes the urgent need for
decisive and equitable action
in addressing inclusive and sustained growth. This content can be used to
present challenges/criticism for the present Budget 2025-26
in your Mains Answers for
Economy and Infrastructure.
_
Let’s learn!
Why in the News?
The Union Finance Minister presented the
on February 1, addressing significant economic challenges while outlining an ambitious plan for
‘Viksit Bharat’
that focuses on various sectors, which although
requires careful evaluation
What are the key highlights from Budget 2025 that would raise the questions?
Fiscal Consolidation Target
: This target aims to reduce the fiscal deficit from the previous year’s estimate of 4.9% and reflects the government’s commitment to managing public debt while balancing necessary public expenditures and economic growth challenges.
The Budget sets a
of 4.4% of GDP for FY26, relying on optimistic revenue projections, including 11.2% growth in total tax revenues and 14.4% in income tax revenues, despite significant tax cuts and economic challenges.
Second Asset Monetisation Plan (2025-30)
: This plan aims to generate ₹10 lakh crore by monetizing government-owned assets. The proceeds from this monetization will be reinvested into new infrastructure projects.
Success of Second Asset Monetisation Plan (2025-30) after previous underperformance raises concerns, and ₹11.54 lakh crore in net market borrowings may crowd out private capital amid weak credit demand.
Additionally, the government has proposed ₹1.5 lakh crore in interest-free loans to states to further support capital expenditure and infrastructure reforms.
Personal Income Tax:
The revisions in income tax rates that exempt incomes up to ₹12 lakh can lead to a loss of ₹1 lakh crore in direct tax revenue due to the following reasons:
Increased Exemptions:
By exempting incomes up to ₹12 lakh, more individuals will not be liable to pay income tax, significantly reducing the overall tax base.
Reduced Tax Rates:
The new tax regime includes lower tax rates for various income brackets, which means that even those who do pay taxes will contribute less than they would under the previous regime.
Impact on Government Revenue:
The expected loss of ₹1 lakh crore in direct tax revenue will limit the government’s financial resources, constraining its ability to fund developmental initiatives and public services.
Declining Household Savings
: As the government foregoes this revenue, it may struggle to maintain or increase public investments, which could exacerbate the already declining household savings rate, impacting long-term economic stability.
India’s Manufacturing Sector:
The Budget aims to bolster India’s manufacturing sector, which currently contributes only
17% to the GDP,
through various initiatives. However, significant challenges remain that could hinder the sector’s growth and competitiveness.
Regulatory Inefficiencies:
By enhancing access to
credit for MSMEs
, the government aims to foster growth, but the existing regulatory framework often hampers business operations, leading to delays and increased costs that undermine competitiveness.
Low Innovation Capacity:
The government has introduced
PLIs
targeting various sectors to encourage domestic production and attract foreign investment. However, the investment in R&D is critically low, currently at just 0.64% of GDP. This lack of focus on innovation limits the ability of Indian manufacturers to compete effectively.
Structural Weaknesses:
The manufacturing sector has been plagued by structural weaknesses such as high costs of raw materials and logistics, which make it less competitive compared to other nations.
For example, steel prices in India are reported to be
20-30% higher than those in China
What are the gaps highlighted by the budget that need to be recognized in the Agricultural Sector?
Significant Agricultural Initiatives taken by the Government in Budget 2025-26:
1. Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana:
Objective:
To enhance agricultural productivity and promote sustainable farming practices in 100 districts characterized by low productivity, moderate crop intensity, and below-average credit access.
The initiative is expected to benefit approximately 1.7 crore farmers by providing them with better financial support and resources. The program will be executed in partnership
with state governments,
leveraging existing schemes and specialized measures to drive focused reforms.
Key Focus Areas:
Introduce
advanced farming techniques
and modern equipment.
Encourage farmers to grow a
variety of crops
instead of relying on a single crop.
storage facilities
at the panchayat and block levels to reduce crop wastage.
Enhance
irrigation infrastructure
to increase agricultural output.
Facilitate easier access to both
short-term and long-term credit
for farmers.
2. National Mission on High-Yielding Seeds:
This mission aims to improve the availability and use of high-yielding seed varieties to boost agricultural productivity across the country.
The mission emphasizes research and development in
seed technology
, ensuring that farmers have access to
superior quality seeds
that can lead to better crop yields.
It will work in conjunction with other agricultural programs, such as the
Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana,
to maximize the impact on food security and farmer income.
3.
ncreased Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Limit:
The loan limit for KCC has been raised from ₹3 lakh to ₹5 lakh, along with targeted support in 100 low-productivity districts, indicating a shift from blanket subsidies to more precise financial assistance for farmers.
Short-Term Loan Focus:
The emphasis on credit enhancements primarily through short-term loans may perpetuate farmers’ dependency on debt without resolving underlying issues.
Systemic inefficiencies in agricultural markets remain unaddressed, particularly regarding price volatility and market access.
Missed Export Opportunities:
The lack of concrete measures to promote agricultural exports, especially as India aims to lead in millets and natural farming, represents a significant missed opportunity.
Services exports, particularly in IT and business process outsourcing, are growing robustly at a 10.5% CAGR, but
efforts to diversify the export portfolio
are lacking.
While initiatives like
Bharat Trade Net (BTN)
export credit support for MSMEs
are positive, they lack the scale necessary to effectively address India’s ongoing trade deficits.
depreciation of the rupee
declining foreign exchange reserves
highlight the need for a more ambitious export strategy.
A fiscal push toward
value-added sectors
such as pharmaceuticals, electronics, renewable energy, and high-value agricultural products could enhance India’s position in global supply chains and improve export competitiveness.
What are the questions raised on other transformative and sustainable pushes?
Lithium-Ion Battery Recycling:
Ace Green Recycling plans to establish India’s largest lithium iron phosphate (LFP) battery recycling facility in Gujarat, with a capacity of 10,000 metric tons per year
by 2026.
ncentives for Clean Tech Manufacturing:
The Budget introduces tax benefits and policy extensions aimed at supporting electric vehicle (EV) startups and clean tech manufacturing. This includes exemptions on cobalt powder and lithium-ion battery
scrap from basic Customs Duty,
which is expected to strengthen India’s battery recycling ecosystem.
Despite these initiatives, the transition to a
low-carbon economy remains fragmented
due to insufficient investment in essential areas like grid modernization and energy storage.
To achieve a successful transition to a low-carbon economy,
India needs a more integrated approach
that includes substantial investments in energy infrastructure alongside the current recycling initiatives.
For example, enhancing energy storage capabilities is crucial for managing the intermittent nature of renewable energy sources like solar and wind power.
Way Forward:
While the Budget lays a promising foundation for economic progress, it requires a comprehensive approach that not only focuses on immediate tax relief but also addresses long-term challenges in productivity, innovation, and market access.
The success of these initiatives will be measured by their ability to create lasting benefits for all segments of society, driving India toward its vision of a prosperous and inclusive economy.
**********On live-in relationships in Uttarakhand
Polity
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Uniform Civil Code;
Why in the News?
Recently, the Uttarakhand government introduced new rules under the Uniform Civil Code to regulate live-in relationships. These rules require couples to complete a 16-page form and, if they wish to marry, obtain a certificate from a religious leader confirming their eligibility.
What has Uttarakhand’s Uniform Civil Code mandated with respect to the registration of live-in relationships?
Mandatory Registration:
Couples in live-in relationships must register their relationship with the government within 30 days of entering into it. This requirement applies to all residents of Uttarakhand, including those living outside the state.
Documentation Required:
Couples must complete a 16-page registration form and provide various documents, which include:
Proof of age, Proof of residency, Details of any previous relationships (marital or live-in) and a certificate from a religious leader
confirming eligibility to marry if they choose to do so.
Should the parents of the individuals be notified by the registrar?
Yes, under Uttarakhand’s Uniform Civil Code (UCC), the registrar is required to notify the parents of individuals in live-in relationships if either partner is under 21 years of age.
This notification is part of the registration process aimed at ensuring parental awareness and consent for younger individuals entering such relationships. For those above 21, their information will be kept confidential, and parents will not be notified.
Are there penalties for concealing the relationship?
Failure to Register:
Couples who do not register their live-in relationship within the specified time frame may face penalties, including:
A jail term of up to three months or a fine up to ₹10,000 for failing to register within 30 days.
If a notice is issued by the registrar and the individual fails to comply, they could face a jail term of up to six months or a fine up to ₹25,000.
False Information:
Providing false information during registration can also lead to penalties, including imprisonment and fines.
What about privacy?
Intrusive Registration Process:
The UCC requires couples to provide extensive personal information during the registration of their live-in relationships, which many individuals find intrusive. Critics argue that this process compromises their privacy by mandating the disclosure of sensitive details about their relationships, including previous partnerships and eligibility for marriage.
Parental Notification:
The requirement to notify parents if either partner is under 21 years old adds another layer of intrusion into personal lives. This provision can lead to unwanted scrutiny from family members, particularly for couples seeking to maintain privacy from their families.
Potential for Misuse:
The UCC allows third parties to raise complaints about live-in relationships, which could lead to moral policing and harassment. This aspect raises fears of social scrutiny and the possibility of individuals facing backlash or pressure from their communities or families based on their relationship status.
Data Security Risks:
Concerns have been voiced about the security of the data collected through the UCC’s online registration portal, especially in light of recent cyberattacks that have impacted Uttarakhand’s IT infrastructure. Residents question how their personal information will be protected and what measures are in place to prevent unauthorized access or breaches.
Way forward:
Safeguard Privacy & Data Protection
– The government should implement stringent data security measures and ensure that personal details remain confidential, limiting access only to authorized personnel. The provision of parental notification for those under 21 should be reconsidered to balance individual rights with social concerns.
Simplify Registration & Reduce Intrusiveness
– The registration process should be streamlined with minimal documentation requirements, avoiding unnecessary personal disclosures. Instead of a blanket mandate, an opt-in registration system or voluntary declaration could be considered to respect personal choices.
Mains PYQ:
Discuss the possible factors that inhibit India from enacting for its citizen a uniform civil code as provided for in the Directive Principles of State Policy.
(UPSC IAS/2017)
**********The legal systems under which citizenship is acquired
Polity
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Citizenship; Indian and US Constitution;
Why in the News?
Recently, U.S. President Donald Trump issued an order stating that, in the future, only children whose parents are U.S. citizens or green card holders will be eligible for U.S. citizenship.
What are the two different principles which govern citizenship laws in various countries?
Jus Soli (Right of Soil):
This principle grants citizenship based on the place of birth. A child born within the territory of a country automatically acquires citizenship, regardless of the nationality of their parents.
Countries such as the United States, Canada, and many Latin American nations follow this principle, allowing for what is often referred to as birthright citizenship.
Jus Sanguinis (Right of Blood):
Under this principle, citizenship is determined by the nationality or citizenship of one or both parents. A child inherits citizenship from their parents, irrespective of where they are born.
Many countries in Europe, Africa, and Asia, including Germany, India, and Egypt, adopt this principle, meaning that a child’s citizenship is based on their parents’ nationality rather than their birthplace.
What was the system in the U.S.?
Historically, the United States has operated under the jus soli principle, as established by the
14th Amendment to the Constitution in 1868.
This amendment states that “all persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States”. The U.S. Supreme Court reaffirmed this interpretation in 1898, confirming that all children born on U.S. soil are entitled to citizenship regardless of their parents’ immigration status.
However,
President Trump’s recent executive order
seeks to alter this long-standing practice by restricting citizenship to children born in the U.S. only if at least one parent is a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident (green card holder).
This order has faced legal challenges, with critics arguing it contradicts constitutional protections established over a century ago.
How are India’s citizenship laws different?
Aspect
U.S. Citizenship
Indian Citizenship
Principle
Jus Soli (by birth)
Jus Sanguinis (by descent) since 1987
Law
14th Amendment (1868)
Citizenship Act, 1955 (Amended in 1987, 2004, and 2019)
Recent Changes
Attempt to limit birthright citizenship (stayed by court)
Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), 2019 grants selective citizenship
Religious Criteria
No religious discrimination
CAA 2019 excludes Muslims from fast-track citizenship
What would be the impact on India?
The executive order creates uncertainty for many families within the Indian-American community, especially those on
temporary visas such as H-1B.
Children born in the U.S. to these parents have traditionally been granted citizenship automatically.
This change could potentially affect thousands of Indian families who may now face challenges regarding their children’s citizenship status if they are born in the U.S.
What are the challenges for the executive order of the president?
Legal Challenges:
A coalition of four states—Washington, Arizona, Illinois, and Oregon—has filed a lawsuit seeking to temporarily suspend the executive order while the court examines its legality.
This request is part of a broader legal challenge involving 18 Democratic-led states and various civil rights organizations, including the ACLU, which argue that the order violates the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution that guarantees citizenship to anyone born on U.S. soil.
Judicial Response:
A federal judge in Seattle has already issued a temporary restraining order against Trump’s executive order, labelling it
“blatantly unconstitutional.”
Way forward:
Judicial Review & Constitutional Adherence:
The U.S. judiciary should ensure that any changes to citizenship laws align with the
and established Supreme Court precedents, preventing unconstitutional restrictions on birthright citizenship.
Policy Reforms & Legislative Clarity:
Instead of executive orders, any significant change to citizenship laws should go through
Congress
with bipartisan consultation, ensuring legal stability and safeguarding the rights of affected families.
PYQ:
[2021]
With reference to India, consider the following statements :​
There is only one citizenship and one domicile.​
A citizen by birth only can become the Head of State.​
A foreigner once granted the citizenship cannot be deprived of it under any circumstances.​
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?​
(a) 1 only ​
(b) 2 only​
(c) 1 and 3 ​ only
(d) 2 and 3 only
**********Agriculture is fiscally neglected in the Budget
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Indian Agriculture;
Why in the News?
A budget reflects how a government addresses the challenges in the economy. The Economic Survey 2024-25 tried to present a positive view of Indian agriculture’s situation.
What are the specific budget allocations for agriculture?
Total Allocation:
The Union Budget for 2025-26 has allocated ₹1.71 lakh crore for agriculture and allied activities, an increase from ₹1.51 lakh crore in the previous fiscal year.
Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana:
This new initiative aims to enhance agricultural productivity in 100 districts with low productivity, targeting 1.7 crore farmers through sustainable practices and improved irrigation facilities.
Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Expansion:
The loan limit under the Modified Interest Subvention Scheme for KCCs will be raised from ₹3 lakh to ₹5 lakh, facilitating better access to credit for farmers.
PM-Kisan Scheme:
The allocation for the PM-Kisan scheme remains at ₹63,500 crore, consistent with the revised estimates from the previous year, aimed at providing direct income support to farmers.
The PM-Kisan scheme provides
annual income support of ₹6,000 to eligible farmers,
distributed in three instalments, which is crucial for enhancing their financial stability.
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana:
This crop insurance scheme has seen a significant reduction in funding, with allocations decreasing from ₹14,600 crore in previous estimates to ₹12,242.27 crore for 2025-26.
Makhana Board:
A new Makhana Board in Bihar has been allocated ₹100 crore, while other missions include ₹100 crore for hybrid seeds and ₹500 crore for cotton technology.
National Mission on Natural Farming:
The mission received a significant allocation of ₹516 crore, emphasizing sustainable agricultural practices and increasing the adoption of natural farming methods.
Support for Pulses and Oilseeds:
The government is launching a six-year mission focused on self-sufficiency in pulses and edible oils, with procurement support from agencies like NAFED and NCCF, aiming to enhance domestic production.
What measures are being proposed to support farmers and enhance agricultural productivity?
This new scheme aims to target 100 districts with low productivity, focusing on improving crop intensity and credit parameters. However, concerns exist regarding its centralized governance approach.
Investment in Sustainable Practices:
The government emphasizes sustainable agriculture practices through initiatives like the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayi Yojana (PMKSY) aimed at enhancing irrigation efficiency.
Post-Harvest Infrastructure Investment:
The Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) is highlighted as a mechanism to improve post-harvest infrastructure, although specific allocations remain unclear.
Does the budget reflect the broader economic context and challenges?
Addressing Farmer Distress:
The budget reflects the urgent need to address farmer distress by extending support measures such as lower loan interest rates and increased PM-KISAN assistance.
The budget emphasizes the importance of sustainable agriculture, with recommendations for increased investment in climate-resilient seeds and agricultural research.
Post-Harvest Management Improvements:
Recognizing significant post-harvest losses, the budget allocates funds to improve cold storage and processing facilities. This investment is crucial for reducing waste and enhancing the value chain, which is vital for improving farmers’ profitability and food security.
Focus on Technological Adoption:
There is a push for greater adoption of agri-tech solutions to tackle issues like low mechanization and inadequate access to quality seeds. This reflects an understanding that modernizing agriculture is essential for boosting productivity and competitiveness in a challenging economic environment.
Long-Term Structural Reforms:
The budget indicates a need for transformational changes rather than incremental adjustments, advocating for a shift from subsidy-heavy approaches to investment-driven growth.
This strategic direction aims to make Indian agriculture more resilient and globally competitive by 2047.
Way forward:
Increased Investment in Agricultural R&D and Infrastructure
– The government should prioritize higher allocations for agricultural research, modern irrigation techniques, and post-harvest infrastructure to enhance productivity and climate resilience.
Targeted Financial Support and Market Reforms
– Strengthening direct income support, improving crop insurance schemes, and ensuring better price realization through MSP reforms and enhanced market linkages will help stabilize farmers’ incomes and boost rural demand.
Mains PYQ:
Explain various types of revolutions, took place in Agriculture after Independence in India. How these revolutions have helped in poverty alleviation and food security in India?
(UPSC IAS/2017)
**********Inland Mangrove of Guneri
Enviro & Biodiversity
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
The Gujarat government has declared the Guneri Inland Mangrove in Kutch as the
state’s first
Biodiversity Heritage Site (BHS)
under The Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
Quick Facts about Mangroves in India:
“Red List of Mangrove Ecosystems” report
released on
May 22 (International Day for Biodiversity), 2024
India holds 3%
of South Asia’s total
mangrove cover
Mangrove cover increased by 54 sq km (1.10%)
, reaching
4,975 sq km
(0.15% of India’s total area).
West Bengal leads (42.45%)
, followed by
Gujarat (23.66%)
Andaman & Nicobar Islands (12.39%)
South 24 Parganas, West Bengal
, alone contributes
41.85%
of India’s mangrove cover, including
Sundarbans National Park
Gujarat recorded the highest increase
, adding
37 sq km
of mangrove cover.
About Guneri Inland Mangroves:
Guneri Inland Mangroves (32.78 hectares) are a
rare and unique mangrove ecosystem
located in
Kutch district, Gujarat
It is
India’s last remaining inland mangrove site
and one of only
eight such sites globally
Unlike coastal mangroves, which thrive in
tidal zones
Guneri mangroves exist inland without direct seawater contact
These mangroves have
historical and ecological significance
, possibly originating
after the Miocene marine transgression
or forming along the banks of the
ancient Saraswati River
in the Great Rann of Kutch.
Geographical Features:
It is located about
45 km from the Arabian Sea
4 km
Kori Creek
Terrain:
Flat land
, unlike coastal mangroves that grow in muddy, tidal zones.
Devoid of
sludge
, making it resemble a forest rather than a typical mangrove swamp.
Water Source:
Thrives on
limestone deposits
, which help retain
groundwater
to sustain the mangroves.
No direct
tidal water influx
, relying entirely on
underground water connectivity
Biodiversity:
Home to
20 migratory bird species
25 resident migratory avifaunal species
Functions as a
vital habitat
for local and seasonal wildlife.
PYQ:
[2015]
Which one of the following regions of India has a combination of mangrove forest, evergreen forest and deciduous forest?
(a) North Coastal Andhra Pradesh
(b) South-West Bengal
(c) Southern Saurashtra
(d) Andaman and Nicobar Islands
**********[pib] National Manufacturing Mission (NMM)
Schemes
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
The
Union Finance Minister
, while presenting the
Union Budget 2025-26
, announced the launch of the
to boost India’s manufacturing sector under the
Make in India initiative
.
What is the National Manufacturing Mission?
The NMM was announced in
initiative.
It covers
small, medium, and large industries
and aims to strengthen
domestic production capabilities, enhance competitiveness, and create jobs
The mission provides
policy support, execution roadmaps, and governance frameworks
for both
central ministries and state governments
It promotes
Clean Tech manufacturing
and focuses on
developing an ecosystem for critical industrial components
such as
solar PV cells, EV batteries, wind turbines, and high-voltage transmission equipment
Aims and Objectives:
Boost domestic production
to reduce import dependence.
Enhance MSME sector growth
with credit expansion (₹10 crore from ₹5 crore).
Key Features & Significance:
Infrastructure & Industrial Clusters
supply chains
National Action Plan for Toys
make India a global toy hub
New footwear & leather industry scheme
to create
22 lakh jobs
and boost exports.
National Institute of Food Technology
in Bihar to
increase farmer incomes
through food processing.
Back2Basics: National Manufacturing Policy (NMP)
Launched in 2011
Aims to
increase GDP share to 25%
create 100 million jobs
in a decade.
Focuses on
National Investment and Manufacturing Zones (NIMZs)
to attract investment and enhance productivity.
Promotes
technology advancement, skill development, and sustainable growth
with fiscal & infrastructure incentives.
Key areas:
Ease of doing business, labor law reforms, export growth, and global competitiveness.
PYQ:
[2012]
What is/are the recent policy initiative(s) of Government of India to promote the growth of manufacturing sector?
1. Setting up of National Investment and Manufacturing Zones
2. Providing the benefit of ‘single window clearance’
3. Establishing the Technology Acquisition and Development Fund
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
**********Bharatiya Bhasha Pustak Scheme
Indian Society
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
In the Union Budget 2025-26, Finance Minister, has introduced the Bharatiya Bhasha Pustak Scheme to provide digital textbooks in Indian languages.
What is Bharatiya Bhasha Pustak Scheme?
Aims and Objectives:
It will provide
digital textbooks and study resources
for students at the
school and university levels
, promoting regional languages in the education system.
The scheme aims to
bridge the language gap
by providing
digital textbooks and study materials
multiple Indian languages
It ensures that
students from diverse linguistic backgrounds
can
study subjects in their mother tongue
, improving comprehension and retention.
It aligns with the
NEP 2020
vision to
promote multilingualism in education
It complements the
ASMITA (Augmenting Study Materials in Indian Languages through Translation and Academic Writing) initiative
22,000 books in Indian languages
will be developed in the next
five years
under ASMITA.
Criteria and Provisions:
The scheme will be
implemented in schools, colleges, and universities
across India.
Institutions affiliated with
UGC, AICTE, and other regulatory bodies
will be part of the initiative.
The scheme will focus on
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics), Social Sciences, Commerce, and Humanities
Special emphasis on
technical education in Indian languages
digital books
will be available on
government-supported e-learning platforms like DIKSHA, e-PG Pathshala, and National Digital Library of India
AI-based tools
will be used to facilitate
translations, voice-assisted learning, and personalized study materials
PYQ:
[2016]
‘SWAYAM’, an initiative of the Government of India, aims at:
(a) Promoting the Self Help Groups in rural areas
(b) Providing financial and technical assistance to young start-up entrepreneurs
(c) Promoting the education and health of adolescent girls
(d) Providing affordable and quality education to the citizens for free
**********[pib] What is Geo-Economic Fragmentation?
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
The
Economic Survey 2024-25
highlights the shift from
globalization to geo-economic fragmentation (GEF)
. Countries are now forming
economic blocs
, with concepts like
“friend-shoring”
gaining prominence.
What is Geo-Economic Fragmentation (GEF)?
GEF refers to the
breakdown of global economic integration
, caused by strategic national policies.
It involves disruptions in
trade, capital flows, foreign direct investment (FDI), and migration
The shift resembles the
Cold War era
, with countries aligning into
Western nations’ imposition of uniform environmental, labor, and social standards
has fueled economic divisions.
World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Monitoring Report (October 2024)
recorded:
169 new trade-restrictive measures
, affecting
$887.7 billion
worth of trade.
A sharp rise from
$337.1 billion in 2023
, reflecting escalating protectionism.
IMF notes that trade fragmentation today is costlier than during the Cold War
, when global trade was just
16% of GDP
Today,
it is 45%
, making economic isolation riskier.
Significance and Impacts of GEF:
Decline of Global Trade:
WTO reported
169 new trade restrictions covering $887.7 billion in 2023-24
, making trade costlier.
FDI Relocation:
Friend-shoring
is concentrating
FDI among geopolitically aligned nations
, reducing capital for emerging economies.
China’s Economic Dominance:
Controls
80% of solar panels, 80% of batteries, and 60% of wind energy
, reshaping supply chains.
Supply Chain Disruptions:
Firms are
shifting from China to India, Vietnam, and Mexico
to diversify risks.
Emerging Market Challenges:
Increased
trade barriers, inflation, and tech restrictions
slow down growth.
Rise in Economic Nationalism:
Nations are prioritizing
domestic industries, energy security, and localized production
over global collaboration.
PYQ:
[2022]
Elucidate the relationship between globalization and new technology in a world of scarce resources, with special reference to India.
[2017]
Which of the following has/have occurred in India after its liberalization of economic policies in 1991?
1. Share of agriculture in GDP increased enormously.
2. Share of India’s exports in world trade increased.
3. FDI inflows increased.
4. India’s foreign exchange reserves increased enormously.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1 and 4 only
(b) 2, 3 and 4 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
**********