Resolution of the Pending Issues Between Telangana and Andhra Pradesh
Why in News?
In a significant first step towards resolving the pending issues between Telangana and Andhra Pradesh resulting from the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act 2014, the CMs of both states agreed to establish two committees.
The two committees - one composed of ministers and the other of officials - will develop a plan for resolving the issues.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Issues Pending Between Telangana and Andhra Pradesh
How will the Issue be Handled by the Two Committees?
Issues Pending Between Telangana and Andhra Pradesh:
Background:
After the bifurcation
of the erstwhile united Andhra Pradesh (AP) in 2014, division of assets and liabilities between the two States remains to be a challenge.
The States make their own interpretation
of the provisions under the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act 2014.
What assets are to be divided?
There are 91 institutions under Schedule IX and 142 institutions under Schedule X of the Act.
Another 12 institutions, not mentioned in the Act, have also become contentious between the States.
Hence, the issue involves 245 institutions with a total fixed asset value of ₹1.42 lakh crore.
Several attempts to resolve the issue bilaterally have ended in failure.
Key bone of contention between the two States:
The division of several institutions like the RTC headquarters and the Deccan Infrastructure and Landholdings Limited (DIL) have become the key bone of contention between the two States.
These institutions have huge land parcels in their possession.
What are the AP government's claims?
The AP government is firm on the implementation of the recommendations given by the expert committee (headed by Sheela Bhide - a retired bureaucrat) for bifurcation of 89 out of the 91 Schedule IX institutions.
But it blames the Telangana government for
selectively accepting the recommendations
, resulting in delays in division of assets and liabilities.
What is the stand of Telangana government?
It has contended that the expert committee’s recommendations were against the interests of Telangana.
The assets located outside the erstwhile united State like Andhra Pradesh Bhavan in New Delhi could be divided between the States on the basis of population as per the provisions of the Act.
Role played by the Centre:
The Act empowers the Union Government to intervene as and when needed.
However, several meetings of the dispute resolution committee headed by the Union Home Secretary could not break the impasse even after 10 years of bifurcation.
The primary issue before the committees
is the apportionment of assets and liabilities of different institutions listed under Schedule IX and X, and those that did not find mention in the Reorganisation Act.
The officials committee
would deliberate on the issues that could be resolved at their level across the table.
The issues that could not be resolved at the official level would then be forwarded to the
committee comprising select ministers
from the two States for finding a solution to the pending issues.
If there are some issues remaining after the Ministerial committee finalises modalities, they will be referred to the
Chief Ministers of the two States.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  1.3 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Tax on Ultra High Net Worth Individuals
Why in News?
The Global Tax Evasion Report 2024 - a report commissioned by Brazil’s G-20 presidency, was recently released.
In this report, French economist Gabriel Zucman has recommended an annual 2% tax on individuals holding wealth exceeding $1 billion.
What’s in Today’s Article?
What is a Wealth Tax?
Analysing the Proposal to Tax Ultra High Net Worth Individuals
Meaning:
A wealth tax is a tax based on the market value of assets owned by a taxpayer.
Wealth tax in India:
It was governed by the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, however, it has been ruled out with effect from 1st April 2016.
Pros and Cons of a Wealth tax
Proponents:
This type of tax is more equitable than an income tax alone, particularly in societies with significant wealth disparity.
It promotes fairness and equality by taking into account taxpayers’ overall economic status, and their ability to pay tax.
Critics:
It discourages the accumulation of wealth, which drives economic growth.
Administration and enforcement
of a wealth tax present challenges, as determining the fair market value of assets leads to valuation disputes between taxpayers and tax authorities.
Uncertainty about valuation also could tempt some wealthy individuals to try
tax evasion.
Analysing the Proposal to Tax Ultra High Net Worth Individuals:
Recommendation:
Individuals possessing more than $1 billion in total wealth (assets, equity shares, etc) would be required to pay a minimum (2% of their wealth) amount of tax annually.
This would be the basic requirement to safeguard global tax progressivity and could potentially raise $200-$250 billion a year globally from about 3,000 individuals.
Rationale for such a tax:
The wealth of the top 0.0001% households has surged more than fourfold since the mid-1980s.
They owned 3% of world GDP in wealth, which rose to 13% in 2024.
However, the contemporary tax systems worldwide are not effectively taxing the wealthiest individuals (effective tax rates are between 0% and 0.5% of their wealth).
As a result, ultra-high-net-worth individuals tend to pay less in tax relative to their income.
This in turn
Deprives governments of substantial tax revenues
Contributes to
concentrating the gains of globalisation into relatively few hand
Undermines the social sustainability of economic globalisation.
Significance of this proposal:
Progressive taxation
is a key pillar of democratic societies that helps strengthen social cohesion and trust in governments to work for the common good.
Better tax revenues are also crucial to meet the investments required to address the
climate crisis.
Impact of this proposal:
Finance Ministers of the G-20 group are set to meet in Rio de Janeiro.
The proposal will serve as the starting point for a global discussion on ensuring under-taxed billionaires are made to contribute more to
reduce inequality worldwide
Supporters and opposers of the proposal:
Supporters:
Brazil, France, Spain, Colombia, Belgium, the African Union and South Africa have backed the idea.
Opposers:
The U.S. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen has opposed a global wealth levy.
Relevance of the proposal for India:
According to a study titled ‘Income and Wealth Inequality in India,’ India has seen a disproportionately sharper increase in wealth at the top of the pyramid between 2014-2023.
Top 1% income and wealth shares
(22.6% and 40.1%) are at their highest historical levels and India’s top 1% income share is among the very highest in the world.
Therefore,
a ‘super tax’ on the very wealthy
might be a good idea for fighting the growing inequalities and providing additional fiscal space for the Indian government.
A mere 2% tax on the total net worth of the 162 wealthiest Indian families will generate revenue equivalent to 0.5% of the country's GDP.
Can the uber-rich worldwide be taxed better.pdf
( Size:  285.9 KB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********What Does the Karnataka Bill Promise Gig Workers?
Why in the News?
On June 29, the Karnataka government published the draft of the
Karnataka Platform-based Gig Workers (Social Security and Welfare) Bill
, making it the second Indian State to initiate such a move, the first being Rajasthan.
What’s in Today’s Article?
About Gig Economy (Meaning, Gig Workers, Size of Economy, Average Income, Challenges, etc.)
News Summary (Key Features of Karnataka Bill)
What is Gig Economy?
A gig economy is a free market system in which organisations hire or contract workers for a short span of time.
Simply put, the positions are temporary to meet the company’s requirements by having short-term engagements.
Startups like Ola, Uber, Zomato, and Swiggy have established themselves as the main source of the gig economy in India.
Who is a Gig Worker?
According to the Code on Social Security, 2020 (India), “
A gig worker is a person who performs work or participates in work arrangements and earns from such activities, outside of the traditional employer-employee relationship
.”
They are independent contractors, online platform workers, contract firm workers, on-call workers and temporary workers.
What is the Size of Gig Economy in India?
A NITI Aayog study on “India’s Booming Gig and Platform Economy” has estimated that at present, about 47 per cent of the gig work is in medium-skilled jobs, about 22 per cent in high skilled, and about 31 per cent in low-skilled jobs.
These figures clearly indicate the importance of the gig working community in the Indian economy.
Ensuring the comfort and security of this community is investing in a more progressive and prosperous future.
Research studies by Boston Consulting Group (BCG) have indicated that participation in the gig economy is higher in developing countries(5-12 percent) versus developed economies(1-4 percent).
Most of these jobs are in lower-income job-types such as deliveries, ridesharing, microtasks, care and wellness.
These studies further estimate that in 2020-21,
77 lakh workers were engaged in the gig economy
The gig workforce is expected to
expand to 2.35 crore workers by 2029-30
What is the Average Age/Income of Gig Workers in India?
median age of Indian gig workers is 27 and their average monthly income is Rs 18,000
Of these, about 71 per cent are the sole breadwinners of their families. Additionally, gig workers operate with an average household size of 4.4.
Challenges Faced by Gig Workers:
While platform companies have created avenues of employment, it has often been marred by
low wages
unequal gender participation
lack of possibility for upward mobility
within an organisation.
This has triggered protests from workers at companies like Swiggy, Zomato, Ola, Uber, and Urban Company, among others.
Gig workers are typically
hired by companies on a contractual basis
and are not considered their employees.
As a result, they do not receive some of the benefits that an on-roll employee of the company may have.
This means they often do not receive benefits like paid sick and casual leaves, travel and housing allowances, and provident fund savings, among other things.
What Needs to be done in Order to Improve the Living Standards of these Gig Workers?
Fiscal Incentives
NITI Aayog in its report ”India’s Booming Gig and Platform Economy” has said that fiscal incentives such as tax-breaks or startup grants may be provided for businesses that provide livelihood opportunities where women constitute a substantial portion of their workers.
Retirement Benefits
The report also recommended firms adopt policies that offer old age or retirement plans and benefits, and other insurance cover for contingencies such as the Covid-19 Pandemic.
Such plans and policies may be envisaged under the
Businesses should consider
providing income support to workers as it would be a “critical step in providing assured minimum earnings and social security from income loss in the wake of uncertainty or irregularity in work”
It also suggesting offering paid sick leave to workers apart from insurance cover.
The Rajasthan Platform Based Gig Workers (Registration and Welfare) Act 2023
Recently, the Rajasthan State Assembly passed the Rajasthan Platform Based Gig Workers (Registration and Welfare) Act 2023.
Under the Act, a board will be established to ensure gig workers’ registration and welfare, addressing their vulnerabilities and providing a platform for collective bargaining and negotiations.
The board can serve as an independent
grievance redress mechanism
The Act also has a provision of establishing a
social security fund
funded through a fee on every transaction.
News Summary:
The Bill seeks to
regulate the social security and welfare of platform-based gig workers
in the State and is expected to be placed in the monsoon session of the Assembly.
Key Features of the Draft Bill:
According to the draft Bill, the
contract between the aggregator and the worker should contain an exhaustive list of grounds on which the contract would be terminated
by the aggregator.
It also stipulates that the aggregator shall not terminate a worker without giving valid reasons in writing and prior notice of 14 days.
Arbitrary terminations have been a major complaint raised by gig workers for many years now.
Instances of blacklisting workers or terminating them from work without hearing out their side have been aplenty.
Also, the draft
mandates aggregators to make payments at least every week
and to inform the worker about the reasons for payment deductions if any.
As per the new draft, a worker will have the right to refuse a specified number of gigs per week with ‘reasonable cause’ without any adverse consequences.
Welfare Fund
A welfare fee will be charged either on each transaction between the worker and the company, or based on the company's total revenue.
This fee, along with contributions from the Union and State governments, will go into a fund.
All gig workers must be registered, and the companies must provide the government with a database of these workers.
The aggregator must also provide reasonable and safe working conditions for workers, although the draft does not delve into what constitutes as ‘reasonable.’
What does the Karnataka Bill promise gig workers.pdf
( Size:  299.0 KB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********Significance of Primary Agriculture Credit Societies
Why in the News?
Union Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation Amit Shah urged stakeholders in cooperative societies to support the establishment of primary agricultural credit societies (PACS) in all villages and blocks of the country.
What’s in Today’s Article?
About PACS (Meaning, Objectives, Benefits, Challenges, etc.)
News Summary
What is a Primary Agricultural Credit Society (PACS)?
PACS are village level
cooperative credit societies
that serve as the last link in a three-tier cooperative credit structure headed by the
State Cooperative Banks (SCB)
at the state level.
Credit from the SCBs is transferred to the
District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs)
, that operate at the district level.
The DCCBs work with PACS, which deal directly with farmers.
Since these are cooperative bodies, individual farmers are members of the PACS, and office-bearers are elected from within them. A village can have multiple PACS.
PACSs
provide short-term, and medium-term agricultural loans to the farmers for the various agricultural and farming activities
Number of PACS in India:
The first PACS was formed in
1904
Currently, there are more than 1,00,000 PACS in the country with a huge member base of more than 13 crore farmers.
However,
only 65,000 of them are functional
Significance of PACS:
The attraction of the PACS lies in the
last mile connectivity they offer
For farmers, timely access to capital is necessary at the start of their agricultural activities.
PACS have the capacity to
extend credit with minimal paperwork within a short time
With other scheduled commercial banks, farmers have often complained of tedious paperwork and red tape.
For farmers, PACS provide strength in numbers, as most of the paperwork is taken care of by the office-bearer of the PACS.
In the case of scheduled commercial banks, farmers have to individually meet the requirement and often have to take the help of agents to get their loans sanctioned.
Challenges Faced by PACS:
Since PACS are cooperative bodies,
political compulsions often trump financial discipline
, and the recovery of loans is hit.
Many committees have pointed out various issues plaguing the cooperative system such as;
Lack of active participation by the members,
Lack of professionalism,
Absence of corporate governance,
Bureaucratisation,
Ageing and unenthusiastic employees.
News Summary:
Addressing a programme at Gandhinagar marking the 102
International Day of Cooperatives in Gandhinagar, Union Minister Amit Shah said that the Government will set up primary agricultural credit societies (PACS) in all villages and blocks of the country.
there are 2 lakh such gram panchayats which lack PACS
He further appealed to all cooperative societies to open bank accounts with local district and state cooperative banks, as well as buy from local dairies, to strengthen the cooperative sector.
He said that the cooperation ministry has undertaken a drive to “establish 2 lakh dairies and PACS” for the 2 lakh gram panchayats which he says lack such facilities.
He added that this move is in addition to an established database which identifies cooperative societies across the country.
In March 2024, the Government had launched the National Cooperative Database and released the ‘
National Cooperative Database 2023: A Report
’.
The database aims to identify and address the gaps through a comprehensive analysis.
He said that the Centre has decided
to ensure formation of Primary Agricultural Credit Societies in every village by 2029
Government will come out with a new national cooperative policy within a month
The new policy, replacing the existing one formulated in 2002, will seek to further strengthen cooperative movement in the country.
Government to unveil new cooperative policy in a month.pdf
( Size:  73.4 KB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********