What is the Doctrine of Lis Pendens?
The Supreme Court has reiterated that once a transaction is found to be hit by the doctrine of lis pendens, then the defences of being a bona fide purchaser and lack of notice regarding the sale agreement are not available.
About Doctrine of Lis Pendens:
Lis pendens in common parlance means “a pending legal action”.
The maxim representing this doctrine means that ‘during the pendency of litigation, nothing new should be introduced, and to maintain the status quo, to abstain from doing anything which may affect any party to the litigation.
It is based on the principle that during the pendency of a suit, the subject matter of it (i.e. the property in the suit) should not be transferred to a third party.
It is dealt with in Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, which provides that if there is any transfer of any immovable property pending litigation, the same shall not affect the rights of the parties in respect to the immovable property.
The outcome of the litigation, passed by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the matter during the pendency of which the transfer had taken place would be binding upon such a purchaser, who has purchased the property during the pending litigation.
It serves to protect the rights and interests of parties involved in a pending law suit concerning a specific property.
Effect of Doctrine of Lis Pendens:
The effect of the rule of lis pendens is not to invalidate or avoid the transfer but to make it subject to the result of the litigation.
According to this rule, therefore, whosoever purchases property during the pendency of a suit is bound by the judgment that may be made against the person from whom he derived the title, even though such a purchaser was not a party to the action or had no notice of the pending litigation.
Conditions for Applicability: The Supreme Court has stated the required elements for the applicability of the rule of lis pendens under Section 52. They are as follows:
The suit must be in the proceeding.
The instituted suit should be filed in court with competent jurisdiction.
The right of title of an immovable property is directly and specifically in question.
The suit directly affects the rights of the other party.
The property in question is being transferred by either party.
The suit must not be collusive (a suit in which a decree is obtained by fraud or collusion) in nature.
Non-Applicability of Doctrine: This doctrine is not applicable in certain cases. They are as follows:
Sale made by the mortgager in the exercise of his power conferred under the deed.
In cases where only the transferor is affected.
In cases where proceedings are collusive in nature.
When the property is not described correctly and makes it unidentifiable.
When the right to the said property is not directly in question and alienation is permitted
Click to View More
Source :
S.52 TP Act | Once Transaction Is Hit By Lis Pendens, Bona Fide Purchase Or Lack Of Notice Of Agreement Not Defences: Supreme Court
Polity & Governance
**********What is Hellfire Missile?
India recently concluded a deal with the US for the procurement of 170 AGM-114R Hellfire missiles.
About Hellfire Missile:
The AGM-114 Hellfire missile is one of the most popular short-range air-to-ground (sometimes air-to-air) laser-guided, subsonic tactical missiles used by the United States military as well as 30 US allies.
The United States began developing the AGM-114 Hellfire in 1972 to address the Army’s requirement for a helicopter-launched antitank missile to counter Soviet armor formations.
The missile is used to target armored vehicles, including tanks, bunkers, radar systems and antennas, communications equipment, soft targets, or hovering helicopters.
It is the missile of choice for several kinds of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), such as the MQ-1B Predator, MQ-9 Reaper, and MQ-1C Grey Eagle.
Features:
It has a length of 1.62 m, a diameter of 17.7 cm and a wingspan of 0.71 m.
Each Hellfire weighs 45.4 kg-49 kg including an 8 kg-9 kg multipurpose warhead.
It is propelled by a single-stage solid-propellant solid-fuel rocket motor.
The missile has a maximum velocity of 950 mph.
Range: 7-11 km
The AGM-114R multipurpose missile is the latest in the Hellfire II missile range.
Also known as the Hellfire Romeo, the missile integrates the capabilities of all previous Hellfire II variants.
It can be launched from several different kinds of fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters, surface ships, and military ground vehicles.
It uses a semi-active laser guidance system and an integrated blast fragmentation sleeve warhead to engage targets that previously needed several Hellfire variants to destroy.
Click to View More
Source :
India, U.S. conclude $3.5-billion deal for procurement of 31 MQ-9B armed UAVs
Science & Tech
**********Roopkund Lake
Climate change is affecting Roopkund Lake in Uttarakhand, causing it to shrink annually.
About Roopkund Lake:
Roopkund, also known as the " lake of skeletons” is a glacial lake in Uttarakhand.
It is situated at 16,500 feet above sea level at the base of Mt. Trishul in the Garhwal Himalayas.
Measuring a mere 130 feet in width, the lake is encased in ice for the majority of the year.
It is surrounded by snow-capped peaks and lush green meadows.
Mystery:
It is called the "lake of skeletons" as the glacial body conceals numbers of human skeletons, some with preserved flesh. These skeletons become visible when snow melts in the region.
These skeletal remains, dating back to around the 9th century AD, have led to various theories about the cause of death.
A 2019 study by scientists from India, the US, and Germany challenged the belief that the skeletons belonged to a single group that perished in a single event, instead suggesting they were genetically diverse individuals who died over a span of up to 1,000 years.
Click to View More
Source :
Uttarakhand’s ‘skeleton lake’ Roopkund shrinking due to climate change?
Geography
**********What is the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO)?
World Food Day is celebrated annually on October 16 across the globe to honour the establishment of the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
About Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO):
It is a specialized agency of the United Nations (UN) that leads international efforts to defeat hunger.
It is the oldest permanent specialized agency of the UN, established in October 1945.
Mandate: To improve nutrition, increase agricultural productivity, raise the standard of living in rural populations, and contribute to global economic growth.
The FAO coordinates the efforts of governments and technical agencies in programs for developing agriculture, forestry, fisheries, and land and water resources.
Other Functions:
Carries out research;
Provides technical assistance on projects in individual countries;
Operates educational programs through seminars and training centres;
Maintains information and support services, including keeping statistics on world production, trade, and consumption of agricultural commodities;
Publishes a number of periodicals, yearbooks, and research bulletins.
Headquarters: Rome, Italy.
Members: It currently has 194 Member States plus the European Union (member organization).
Funding: FAO receives 100 percent of its funding from its member countries.
In case of scarcity or conflict, the FAO usually does not intervene directly with food relief operations. Within the UN system, these activities are generally entrusted to the World Food Program.
Reports published by the FAO: The State of the World's Forests (SOFO), The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture (SOFIA), The State of Agricultural Commodity Markets (SOCO), The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World (SOFI).
Click to View More
Source :
World Food Day 2024: Date, history, significance and all you need to know
Economy
**********Who are the Hibakusha?
Nihon Hidankyo, the organisation that worked for the welfare of the survivors of the 1945 bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki—called the hibakusha—has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 2024.
About Hibakusha:
Hibakusha is the Japanese word for survivors of the 1945 atomic bomb attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
On August 6, 1945, the United States dropped the Little Boy atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan.
Three days later, the US dropped a second atomic bomb, known as Fat Man, on Nagasaki, Japan.
By the end of 1945, more than 200,000 people died as a direct result of these bombings.
Many thousands of people survived with injuries from the attacks. They came to be known as hibakusha, which translates to bomb-affected people.
Niju hibakusha, double survivors, applies to more than 160 people who were present at both Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Currently, the combined number of ‘hibakusha’ who are alive is officially 1,06,825, according to Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. Their average age is 85.6 years.
Hibakusha receives support from the Japanese government, including a medical allowance.
However, in Japan there continues to be discrimination against both the hibakusha and their children, and even grandchildren, based on the common belief that they may be physically or psychologically weakened and that radiation effects are hereditary or contagious.
Click to View More
Source :
Sufferers, awarded: On the 2024 Nobel Peace Prize
Miscellaneous
**********What are Swell Waves?
Recently, the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) in Hyderabad, has issued extensive advisories for swell waves for Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep islands as well as parts of coastal areas.
About Swell Waves:
A swell is the formation of long wavelength waves on the surface of the sea. These are composed of a series of surface gravity waves.
Swell waves organise themselves into groups of similar heights and periods and then travel long distances without much change.
Formation:
They occur not due to the local winds, but rather due to distant storms like hurricanes, or even long periods of fierce gale winds.
During such storms, huge energy transfer takes place from the air into the water, leading to the formation of very high waves. Such waves can travel thousands of kilometres from the storm centre until they strike shore.
Features
Swells have a narrower range of frequencies and directions than locally generated wind waves, because swell waves have dispersed from their generation area, have dissipated and therefore lost an amount of randomness, taking on a more defined shape and direction.
These waves can propagate in directions that differ from the direction of the wind, in contrast to a wind sea.
Their wavelengths may rarely exceed more than 150 m. Swell wavelength, also, varies from event to event. Occasionally, swells which are longer than 700 m occur as a result of the most severe storms.
It occurs without precursors or any kind of local wind activity and as a result.
In India early warning systems like the Swell Surge Forecast System launched by the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) in 2020 — give forewarning seven days in advance.
Click to View More
Source :
What are swell waves? | Explained
Geography
**********What is Ossification test?
Recently, a Mumbai court ordered an ossification test to determine whether one of the persons accused in the murder case of a political leader is a minor or not.
About Ossification test:
An ossification test is a medical procedure that analyses bones in order to determine age.
This test involves taking X-rays of certain bones in the body, such as the clavicle, sternum, and pelvis, to determine the degree of growth in our bones.
Because certain bones harden and fuse with each other at certain ages according to a human's developmental stage, the bones can be a way of marking age.
These bones are chosen because they tend to undergo the most dramatic changes in their form as a person ages.
Example: The clavicle, for instance, is a long bone connecting the shoulder blade to the sternum. It undergoes a gradual fusion of growth plates as a person matures.
In children and adolescents, ossification reflects the progression of bone development, with certain bones hardening at specific ages.
Application of Ossification test
This test is commonly used in forensic science and legal contexts to accurately determine an individual's age when needed.
It is also used in some medical settings, such as to assess skeletal maturity in children with growth disorders.
Click to View More
Source :
What is ossification test, which one of Baba Siddique murder accused underwent
Science & Tech
**********What is Mechazilla?
Recently, SpaceX has achieved a significant milestone in space exploration by landing its Starship rocket using an innovative structure called "Mechazilla."
About Mechazilla:
It is the nickname for the large 400-ft rocket-catching structure at SpaceX's Starbase.
Feature
It features two enormous mechanical arms, often referred to as "chopsticks." These arms are designed to catch the Super Heavy booster in midair as it returns to Earth.
Working of Mechazilla
Launch and Ascent: The SpaceX Starship rocket, along with its Super Heavy booster, launches from the ground.
Booster Separation: After reaching a certain altitude, the booster separates from the upper stage of the rocket.
Controlled Descent: The booster begins descending back to Earth, using precision thrusters to control its path.
Catching the Booster: As the booster nears the landing site, Mechazilla's giant arms move into position. The booster hovers briefly before the arms catch it, ensuring a safe and controlled landing.
Significance:
Re-useable: This new method of rocket recovery is far more efficient and reusable compared to traditional landing techniques.
Cost effective: By catching the booster in midair, SpaceX can quickly refurbish and reuse it, significantly reducing launch costs and increasing the sustainability of space missions.
Click to View More
Source :
What is 'Mechazilla'? The giant arms that caught the massive Starship rocket midair
Science & Tech
**********e-Migrate Portal
Recently, the Union External Affairs Minister and Labour and Employment Minister launched the updated e-Migrate portal and mobile app.
About e-Migrate Portal:
It is an online platform launched by the Government of India to facilitate and manage the migration of Indian workers seeking employment abroad.
It aims to provide a safe and transparent framework for migrant workers by offering various services, including information access, documentation, helpline support, integration with services and awareness campaigns
It promotes safe and legal mobility channels for Indian migrants.
The enhanced e-Migrate portal aligns with the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goal 10, promoting orderly and responsible migration.
Features
The upgraded platform offers 24/7 multilingual helpline support and a feature for feedback, ensuring timely redressal of issues faced by workers abroad, especially in the Gulf region.
The revamped system integrates with Digilocker, enabling secure, paperless document submission.
Additionally, a partnership with Common Service Centres (CSCs) will expand immigration services to rural areas in local languages, enhancing accessibility.
The platform also supports job-seekers by offering a one-stop marketplace for overseas employment opportunities.
Click to View More
Source :
India launches revamped e-Migrate web portal and mobile app to help to promote safe and legal mobility
Polity & Governance
**********Diphtheria
To contain the diphtheria outbreak in the Deeg district of Rajasthan, teams of the state health department and World Health Organization (WHO) have landed in the district and started vaccination.
About Diphtheria:
It is a serious contagious bacterial infection of the nose and throat.
It is caused by strains of bacteria called Corynebacterium diphtheriae that make a toxin.
Transmission:
It can spread from person to person, usually through respiratory droplets, like from coughing or sneezing.
People can also get sick from touching infected open sores or ulcers.
The bacteria can also infect the skin, causing open sores or ulcers. However, diphtheria skin infections rarely result in severe disease.
Although diphtheria can be treated with medications, in advanced stages, the bacterial infection can damage the heart, kidneys and nervous system.
Symptoms:
Typical symptoms of the infection include a sore throat, fever, swollen neck glands and weakness.
Within 2–3 from infection, the dead tissue in the respiratory tract forms a thick, grey coating that can cover tissues in the nose, tonsils and throat, making it hard to breathe and swallow.
Treatments
neutralization of unbound toxin with Diphtheria Antitoxin (DAT)
antibiotics to prevent further bacterial growth;
monitoring and supportive care to prevent and treat complications, e.g. airway obstruction, myocarditis.
Click to View More
Source :
WHO team reaches Rajasthan’s Deeg after 7 children die of diphtheria in a month
Science & Tech
**********PM Modi Pitches for Framing Global Digital Framework for Ethical Use of Technology
About the News:
PM Modi inaugurated the
World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly
(WTSA) 2024 and the 8th edition of the India Mobile Congress at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi.
What’s in Today’s Article?
About ITU (Meaning, Objective, Functions)
About IMC (Meaning, Objectives, etc.)
News Summary (Key Highlights of PM Modi’s Speech)
About International Telecommunication Union (ITU):
It is a
United Nations specialized agency
for Information and Communication Technologies (ICT).
It was originally founded in 1865 to facilitate international connectivity in communications networks.
Allocates global radio spectrum and satellite orbits
Develops technical standards that ensure networks and technologies seamlessly interconnect
Strives to improve access to ICTs to underserved communities worldwide.
Headquarters
: Geneva, Switzerland
About India Mobile Congress (IMC):
IMC is one of the largest telecom, media, and technology forums in Asia, organized annually.
It serves as a platform for industry leaders, policymakers, innovators, and stakeholders to come together and discuss the future of
digital communications
telecommunications
in India and across the globe.
The event focuses on advancements in areas like
5G technology
artificial intelligence (AI)
internet of things (IoT)
cybersecurity
digital infrastructure
Key Objectives of IMC:
Showcase Technological Advancements
: IMC highlights the latest innovations in the telecom and digital sectors, offering a platform for startups, companies, and innovators to showcase their solutions.
Global Collaboration
: The event encourages collaboration between global and Indian telecom players, creating opportunities for cross-border partnerships in the technology and communications sector.
Policy Discussions
: IMC serves as a space for discussions between
government officials
telecommunication regulations
, digital governance, and infrastructure development.
Enabling Digital India
: IMC aligns with the
vision by promoting advancements in digital communication and laying the foundation for future technologies like
6G
cloud computing
News Summary:
(WTSA) 2024 and the 8th edition of the IMC.
The event aimed at setting global telecommunication standards and discussing the future of telecommunications as a global good.
The Prime Minister emphasized India's significant role in the telecom sector, with
120 crore mobile users, 95 crore internet users, and 40% of global digital transactions
being from India.
Key Highlights of the PM’s Speech:
India's Telecom Achievements
PM Modi praised India's transformative journey in telecom, stating that telecom has bridged the urban-rural divide and created opportunities for millions.
India has rapidly adopted
, making it the second-largest 5G market globally, and is already progressing towards
6G technology
Digital Public Infrastructure
PM Modi highlighted the success of the
initiative, built on
four pillars
: affordable devices, extensive connectivity, accessible data, and a ‘Digital First’ approach.
Platforms like
UPI
JAM Trinity
ONDC
have created millions of opportunities and contributed to the country's digital transformation.
Women in Tech
PM Modi stressed the importance of women-led development in technology and mentioned initiatives like
Drone Didi
Bank Sakhi
program to empower women in rural areas.
He emphasized the rising role of women in India's tech sector, noting that 40% of STEM students are women and many women are leading startups.
Global Governance of Technology
PM Modi called for the establishment of global standards for
ethical AI
data privacy
, emphasizing that global collaboration is essential to build a secure and inclusive digital ecosystem.
He urged global institutions to create a framework similar to the aviation industry for governing digital tools and technologies.
Responsible Innovation
PM Modi underlined the need for human-centric, responsible innovation in the digital revolution, ensuring that no country or community is left behind.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  140.2 KB  )
Click to View More
Science & Tech
**********The Need for More Containers to Boost India's Trade
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background (Context of the Article)
About Containers (Importance in Trade, India’s Container Production, Govt Initiatives, Benefits, etc.)
Background:
India’s trade is growing rapidly, with a significant focus on
containerized transport
to facilitate swift movement of goods across the country and internationally.
However, a major challenge hindering India's trade expansion is the
shortage of containers
Currently, India's capacity for producing containers falls far short of what is needed to support its ambitious trade targets.
Importance of Containers in Global Trade:
are essential to modern trade. These standardized, box-like structures allow for goods to be efficiently transported via
rail, road, and sea
Containerization revolutionized global trade by reducing transportation time, minimizing port delays, and enabling the seamless movement of cargo. The key advantages of containers include:
Efficiency
: Once goods are sealed inside containers, they can be transported over long distances without disturbance.
Global Standardization
: Containers come in
standardized sizes
(such as the 20-foot equivalent unit, or TEU), making them compatible with transport systems across the world.
The availability of containers has become so critical that it is often referred to as the
untold story of globalization
Without sufficient containers, even the best infrastructure cannot efficiently handle the trade of goods.
India’s Current Container Production Scenario:
Despite being strategically located on the
East-West trade route
, India's ability to become a
global trade hub
is limited by its container production capacity.
Currently, India manufactures
10,000 to 30,000 containers
annually, which is a small fraction of what is required to support the projected growth in trade.
In contrast,
China
produces
2.5 to 3 million containers
per year, dominating the global container manufacturing market.
India’s production costs are also higher, with container manufacturing costing between
$3,500 and $4,800
per unit, compared to
$2,500 to $3,500
in China.
As a result, India has to
lease containers
, mostly from China, further increasing the cost and limiting India's ability to fully utilize its ports.
Strategic Importance of Increasing Container Production:
India’s ports, such as those at
Vadhavan
Galathea Bay
, along with initiatives like the
India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor
, are built around the assumption of
increased container capacity
If India fails to scale up container production, these ventures risk underperforming.
At present, India's container handling market is expected to grow from
11.4 million TEUs in 2023 to 26.6 million TEUs by 2028
Without adequate container supply, India’s ports will struggle to handle the increased demand, and global shipping giants will continue to favour other hubs like
Colombo, Dubai
Hong Kong
over Indian ports.
Global Context & Challenges:
India’s container shortage is exacerbated by global factors.
Russia-Ukraine
war and
conflicts in West Asia
have disrupted shipping routes, causing longer voyages and delays in container availability.
Rising
piracy
and the closure of key ports due to geopolitical tensions have further increased freight rates.
These factors make it even more crucial for India to establish a stable and secure supply of containers to avoid disruptions in its trade.
Govt. Initiatives & Solutions:
To address the container shortage, the Indian government has launched several initiatives under the
Make in India
program, which aims to boost indigenous container production. Some of the key measures being considered include:
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP)
Collaboration between the
Container Corporation of India
and private sector players to ramp up container manufacturing.
Subsidies and Incentives
The government is exploring
direct subsidies
viability gap funding
to support container manufacturers.
Production Linked Incentives (PLI)
are being considered, but they have yet to be implemented.
Incentives for Raw Materials
GST relaxation
for raw materials used in container production would reduce input costs, making domestic production more competitive.
Long-term contracts between Indian shippers and container manufacturers could help stabilize the market and build confidence.
Tracking and Management
The government is working on a
Unified Logistics Interface Platform (ULIP)
and a
Logistics Data Bank
to track and trace containers more efficiently, thereby reducing the turnaround time for export containers and easing shortages.
Long-Term Benefits of Boosting Container Production:
Lower Freight Costs
: With more locally produced containers, the reliance on leased containers from China will decrease, lowering freight costs for Indian shippers.
Improved Port Utilization
: Indian ports could handle more
mother ships
(large ocean vessels), which would enhance India’s position as a
Job Creation
: Expanding the container manufacturing sector would create jobs and stimulate
economic growth
within India.
Resilience in Global Trade
: By developing a strong domestic supply of containers, India would be less vulnerable to global disruptions and fluctuations in freight rates.
Conclusion:
India's container shortage presents a significant challenge to its trade ambitions, but the government is taking steps to address this bottleneck through initiatives like
PPP collaborations
By increasing container production, reducing manufacturing costs, and improving logistics, India can strengthen its position in global trade, reduce dependency on foreign suppliers, and ensure the smooth transport of goods through its strategically located ports.
The success of these initiatives will be crucial in realizing India's goal of becoming a global trade powerhouse.
On the need to make more containers to boost trade.pdf
( Size:  279.8 KB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********SC norms to curb misuse of abetment of suicide law
Why in news?
Recently, the Supreme Court had said that police and the courts should avoid “unnecessary prosecutions” in cases of abetment of suicide stemming from the workplace.
The court was hearing the case of a salesman who died by suicide after alleged harassment from senior officers in his company.
What’s in today’s article?
Abetment of suicide
Background of the present case
Ruling of SC in the present case
Previous Court Rulings on Abetment of Suicide
About
Abetment of suicide refers to the act of encouraging, instigating, or aiding another person to commit suicide.
Abetment under Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) 2023
‘Abetment’ is defined under
Section 107 of the Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (IPC), which is the same as
Section 45 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita
, 2023 (BNS).
A person abets the doing of a thing, if he:
instigates any person to do that thing, or
engages with one or more others in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, or
intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
In legal cases, proving abetment often requires showing a clear connection between the accused's actions and the deceased's suicide, typically through direct or strong encouragement.
Punishment
The punishment for abetment of suicide provided under Section 306 IPC (Section 108 BNS) can be up to 10 years imprisonment along with a fine.
Abetment of suicide is an offence tried in a Sessions court and is cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable in nature.
Cognizable offence
: A police officer can make an arrest without a warrant from a court.
Non-bailable offence
: Bail is granted to the accused at the discretion of the court, and not as a matter of right.
Non-compoundable offence
: The case cannot be withdrawn by the complainant even when the complainant and the accused have reached a compromise.
According to the FIR, senior officers at a company had "compelled" and "harassed" a salesman, Rajeev Jain, to opt for the company's Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) in 2006.
Jain, who had served the company for more than 23 years, refused to take the VRS despite persistent pressure from his senior officers, including his team’s head.
Later, Jain committed suicide by hanging himself. His brother, Rajnish, filed a case against the senior officers, accusing them of abetting Jain's suicide.
The Allahabad High Court, upon reviewing the officers' plea to quash the case, held
that there was a direct link between the meeting
where Jain felt "humiliated and threatened" and his subsequent suicide.
The present ruling by SC comes against this backdrop.
Ruling by the SC
Overturned Previous Judgment
The bench overturned a 2017 Allahabad High Court decision, finding insufficient evidence to support a prima facie case of abetment in the suicide of a employee who felt harassed by superiors.
Direct Incitement Required
The Supreme Court (SC) emphasized that in cases of abetment of suicide, there must be
direct and alarming encouragement
or incitement by the accused.
It highlighted the need for direct incitement or overwhelming harassment that leads to psychological distress, distinguishing between emotional conflicts and clear-cut cases of abetment.
Categories of Relationships
The judgment delineated two main categories of relationships that could lead to charges of abetment:
Personal Relationships
: In intimate relationships (e.g., family ties), emotional disputes can trigger psychological distress, but a simple argument or harsh exchange is insufficient for abetment.
Professional Relationships
: For official relationships, professional disputes must reach an extreme level of harassment to meet the criteria for abetment.
Requirements for Conviction
To secure a conviction under
Section 306 of the IPC
, the court clarified that there must be
evidence indicating that the accused intended to provoke the suicide or acted in a way that made the deceased feel trapped with no recourse
The court emphasized that intention must be established through thorough examination of the context rather than assuming it solely based on the act of suicide.
M Mohan v The State (2011)
The SC established a high standard for proving abetment of suicide under Section 306 of the IPC.
The ruling specified that there
must be a specific intent demonstrated by an active or direct act that compelled the deceased to take their own life, leaving them feeling as though there were no alternatives
This act must have been intended to push the individual into a position leading to suicide.
Karnataka High Court Ruling (July 2023)
In a notable case involving the suicide of an employee from the LGBT community, the Karnataka HC declined to quash proceedings against three accused individuals.
The court found that the accused, including team leaders and managers, had harassed the employee and made threats of sexual exploitation, contributing to the suicide in June 2023.
The HC emphasized that there are no specific parameters for interference in abetment of suicide cases.
It noted that actions such as tarnishing the self-esteem of a sensitive individual could establish guilt for abetting suicide.
Moreover, behaviors that irritate or annoy the deceased, pushing them to despair, would constitute abetment.
Ude Singh v State of Haryana (2019)
In another case, the SC reaffirmed that
establishing abetment of suicide relies heavily on the individual facts of each case
The ruling stated that there must be a direct or indirect act of incitement leading to suicide.
The accused could be deemed guilty if evidence suggests they intended for the act (suicide) to occur, and the actions taken were aimed at that outcome. Each case must be assessed within the framework of Section 306 IPC.
SC norms to curb misuse of abetment of suicide law.pdf
( Size:  631.1 KB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Greenwashing Guidelines
Why in news?
The Centre has introduced new guidelines to prevent companies from making false or misleading claims about their products' environmental benefits.
These rules
, issued by the Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA),
require companies to provide scientific evidence to support their claims.
The guidelines are part of a broader effort to crack down on misleading advertisements. These norms would complement the existing
Guidelines for Prevention of Misleading Advertisements and Endorsement for Misleading Advertisements
2022, which deal with false or exaggerated claims in advertisements in general.
What’s in today’s article?
Key highlights of advertising guidelines for preventing greenwashing
About
It refers to the growing practice of companies, organizations, and even countries making dubious or unverifiable claims about their environmental or climate-friendly activities.
While the term has been primarily used in the context of advertising, its implications are much broader.
It presents a false picture of the progress being made on the climate change front, thereby pushing the world towards disaster, while at the same time rewarding entities for irresponsible behaviour.
Famous Examples
Major cases of greenwashing include the
2015 Volkswagen scandal
, where the company manipulated emissions tests to appear environmentally friendly.
Other corporations like Shell, BP, and Coca-Cola have also been accused of greenwashing.
Governments too, have been implicated, such as exaggerating the carbon absorption potential of their forests or overemphasizing the impact of certain regulations.
Carbon trading and offset practices have similarly come under scrutiny for lacking scientific rigor.
Sometimes companies do make genuine mistakes — overestimating the impact of their environment-friendly projects.
However, very often they lie, or mislead, and these constitute the more serious cases of greenwashing.
Global Efforts to Combat Greenwashing
In response to the widespread nature of greenwashing, UN Secretary-General António Guterres called for a
zero-tolerance policy
high-level expert group was formed to propose strategies for curbing greenwashing
, particularly among non-state actors like corporations and financial institutions.
Key recommendations included:
banning fresh investments in fossil fuels,
setting short-term emission reduction targets,
halting deforestation activities, and
discouraging the use of carbon offset mechanisms at the initial stages of pursuing net-zero commitments.
Why greenwashing is fairly widespread?
The processes and products that can potentially cut emissions are so many that it is practically impossible to monitor and verify all.
There is lack of regulation and standardisation in most of these spaces.
The processes, methodologies and institutions to measure, report, create standards, verify claims and grant certifications are still being set up.
Also, large number of organisations have sprung up claiming expertise in these areas and offering their services for a fee.
Many of these organisations lack integrity and robustness, but their services are still availed by corporations because it makes them look good.
Way forward - Six principles for trustworthy environmental claims
Background
The government initiated the drafting of these guidelines in November 2023, forming a committee that held three meetings and submitted a draft earlier this year.
After seeking public comments, the final guidelines were released.
Definition of Greenwashing in Advertising
The guidelines define greenwashing as any deceptive or misleading practice where relevant information is concealed, exaggerated, or vague claims are made regarding the environmental benefits of a product or service.
This can involve the use of misleading words, symbols, or imagery that highlight positive environmental aspects while concealing the negative ones.
Allowance for Hyperbole
The guidelines permit the use of "obvious hyperboles" or "puffery," which are common in advertising, as long as they do not amount to deception or misleading the consumer.
For instance, claims about growth being based on "sustainable principles" would not be considered misleading.
However, more specific claims, like stating that all products are manufactured sustainably, would need to be substantiated.
Use of Generic Environmental Terms
Generic terms such as "clean," "green," "eco-friendly," and "sustainable" are only allowed if companies can provide evidence to support such claims.
Advertisements must use accurate qualifiers and disclosures, ensuring that these terms are not vague or misleading.
Clarification of Technical Terms
When using technical terms such as "environment impact assessment" or "greenhouse gas emissions," companies must explain their meaning and implications in a way that is easily understood by consumers.
The guidelines emphasize the importance of making these terms clear and accessible to the public.
Requirements for Specific Environmental Claims
More specific environmental claims—such as "compostable," "non-toxic," or "plastic-free"—must be supported by reliable scientific evidence, certifications, or third-party verification.
This ensures that companies can substantiate their claims with credible sources.
Applicability of the Guidelines
The guidelines apply to all environmental claims made by manufacturers, service providers, or advertisers, and extend to advertising agencies and endorsers involved in promoting such products or services.
The guidelines strictly prohibit engaging in greenwashing and misleading environmental claims.
Greenwashing Guidelines.pdf
( Size:  3.7 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Canada accuses Indian diplomats?
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
India-Canada Relations;
Why in the News?
India-Canada relations have reached a historic low after Justin Trudeau’s government accused Indian officials of being involved in “activities that pose a significant threat to public safety,” claims that New Delhi has strongly rejected as “preposterous.”
What specific allegations has Canada made against Indian diplomats?
Violent Extremism:
Canadian authorities claim that agents of the Government of India have been involved in violent extremist activities affecting both countries.
Involvement in Criminal Activity:
The
Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP)
have accused Indian diplomats and consular officials of being linked to homicides, acts of violence, and the use of organized crime to create a sense of insecurity among the South Asian community in Canada.
Foreign Interference:
Investigations suggest Indian officials leveraged their positions to collect information on certain individuals or groups in Canada, either directly or through proxies. This intelligence was allegedly shared with the
Research and Analysis Wing (RAW)
in India.
Threats and Coercion:
The allegations include coercion tactics where individuals in Canada were reportedly threatened regarding their immigration status or faced risks to their family members in India.
Connections with Organized Crime:
There are claims that Indian intelligence conveyed information to criminal networks in India, allegedly linked to gangster
Lawrence Bishnoi,
who is in custody in India. These networks are suspected of intimidating or targeting Canadians of South Asian descent.
Involvement in Assassinations:
The controversy began with the assassination of Khalistani activist Hardeep Singh Nijjar in Surrey, and was further linked to the killing of Sukhdool Singh Gill in Winnipeg. Both incidents allegedly have ties to Indian government directives.
How has India responded to Canada’s accusations?
Denial of Allegations:
India has categorically dismissed the allegations as “absurd” and “preposterous.” Indian authorities have rejected claims of any involvement in criminal activities in Canada or targeting the Sikh community.
Accusations of Canadian Tolerance for Extremism:
New Delhi has countered by accusing Canada of allowing anti-India elements and Khalistani separatist groups to operate freely, impacting India’s sovereignty and security.
Denial of Diplomatic Cooperation:
Reports suggest that while India initially agreed to cooperate with the Canadian investigation, it later denied visas to RCMP officials who intended to share evidence with Indian counterparts.
What actions have both countries taken in retaliation?
Expulsion of Diplomats:
Following Canada’s expulsion of an Indian diplomat, India retaliated by expelling a senior Canadian diplomat, escalating the diplomatic dispute.
Visa Suspension:
In response to the diplomatic tensions, India suspended visa services for Canadian citizens, citing security concerns for Indian diplomatic personnel in Canada.
Reduced Diplomatic Presence:
The crisis has resulted in both nations significantly scaling back their diplomatic staff, affecting consular services and visa issuance.
Diplomatic Disengagement:
India’s foreign minister has hinted at limiting diplomatic interactions with Canada, reflecting the deterioration in bilateral ties.
What are the potential implications of this diplomatic crisis for both sides?
Bilateral Relations:
The row represents a historic low in India-Canada relations. Both nations may experience prolonged diplomatic disengagement, adversely affecting cooperation in trade, education, and defence.
Economic Impacts:
Canada is a significant partner for Indian students and the Punjabi diaspora, which could face disruptions in visa issuance, immigration processes, and consular services.
Geopolitical Ramifications:
The dispute may strain India’s relations with Western allies, including the United States, which has strong ties with both India and Canada.
Division in Diaspora Communities:
The Sikh community in Canada could be further divided, with escalating tensions around pro-Khalistan activities. Allegations against Indian officials may also increase anti-India sentiments among diaspora groups.
Way forward:
Diplomatic Engagement and De-escalation
: Both countries should prioritize diplomatic channels to de-escalate tensions, perhaps through neutral intermediaries or international platforms, ensuring that the crisis does not further damage long-term relations, trade, and people-to-people ties.
Focused Cooperation on Extremism and Criminal Activity
: A joint task force or collaborative investigation involving both nations could be set up to address concerns about violent extremism and criminal activity, fostering transparency and trust, while respecting sovereignty and legal frameworks.
**********‘Yield’ can’t be the sole indicator for agriculture
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Issues related to agricultural productivity;
Why in the News?
Government must embrace a new approach where the success of agriculture is defined by its capacity to nourish people, support livelihoods, and safeguard our planet for future generations.
What are the limitations of using yield as the sole indicator of agricultural success?
Nutritional Quality Neglect as per ICAR (
Indian Council for Agricultural Research)
Focusing on yield has led to a decline in the
nutritional profile
of crops. High-yielding varieties often have lower micronutrient densities, as seen in reduced
zinc and iron
levels in rice and wheat.
Increased Input Costs:
Higher yield does not always correlate with increased farmer income. The cost of achieving additional yield may be high, especially as the response to
fertilizers has declined significantly since the 1970s.
Biodiversity Loss:
The emphasis on a few high-yielding varieties leads to the loss of diverse, local crop varieties. For example, India has lost around
104,000 rice varieties
Green Revolution.
Environmental Impact:
Intensive farming to maximize yield can degrade soil health, reduce water availability, and harm the ecosystem, making agriculture less sustainable.
Reduced Resilience:
The prioritization of yield over other factors makes crops less resilient to extreme weather events such as floods, droughts, and heatwaves.
How do other indicators complement yield in assessing agricultural sustainability?
Nutritional Output Per Hectare:
This indicator measures not just the quantity but the quality of the food produced, addressing nutritional security.
Soil Health Metrics:
Including soil biological activity and soil organic carbon in evaluations helps ensure long-term soil fertility and productivity.
Water-Use Efficiency:
Metrics like water-use efficiency track the amount of water required to produce crops, promoting conservation.
Farm Biodiversity:
Assessing crop diversity at the farm and regional levels (Landscape Diversity Score) improves resilience to pests, diseases, and climate variability.
Economic Resilience Metrics:
Indicators such as income diversification (through intercropping, livestock rearing, etc.) can help measure farmers’ economic stability.
Environmental Impact Measures:
Tracking parameters like carbon footprint and ecosystem services evaluates the broader impact of agricultural practices.
What practices can farmers adopt to improve sustainability beyond just increasing yield? (Way forward)
Intercropping:
Growing multiple crops together (e.g., sugarcane with vegetables) can provide year-round income and enhance soil health.
Agroecological Approaches:
Practices such as crop rotation, organic farming, and reduced pesticide use help maintain biodiversity and soil fertility.
Water Management Techniques:
Using methods like drip irrigation and AI-powered tools for optimal irrigation ensures better water use.
Integrated Pest Management (IPM):
Combining biological, mechanical, and chemical control methods reduces reliance on harmful pesticides.
Conservation Agriculture:
Techniques such as no-till farming and mulching help improve soil structure and retain moisture.
Adopting Climate-Resilient Varieties:
Growing drought-tolerant or flood-resistant crop varieties helps mitigate the impacts of climate change.
Mains PYQ:
Discuss the various economic and socio-cultural forces that are driving increasing feminization of agriculture in India.
(UPSC IAS/2014)
**********A Nobel prize for explaining why nations fail or succeed
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Shortcomings of AMRUT;
Why in the News?
U.S. economists Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson won the 2024 Economics Nobel for their research on how the formation of institutions influences a nation’s prosperity and economic success.
What are the key factors that explain why some nations are rich while others are poor?
Quality of Institutions:
According to the 2024 Nobel laureates, the primary determinant of economic success is the quality of a country’s institutions. Inclusive institutions, which ensure secure property rights, political freedoms, and economic opportunities, tend to promote growth.
Rule of Law and Property Rights:
When laws protect private property and are enforced impartially, individuals are incentivized to invest and engage in economic activities. Weak or corrupt legal systems can deter investments and slow growth.
Political Stability and Governance:
Countries with stable, democratic governance structures often provide a conducive environment for economic activities. In contrast, political instability and authoritarianism can hinder development.
Geography and Natural Resources:
Some scholars argue that geographic factors, such as access to trade routes and natural resource endowment, play a role in shaping a nation’s wealth. However, resource-rich nations can still struggle if their institutions are weak (resource curse).
Human Capital and Education:
Nations that invest in education and healthcare build a skilled and productive workforce, which can drive long-term economic growth.
Technological and Industrial Development:
The ability to adopt and innovate technologies is crucial for economic advancement, which historically facilitated the “Great Divergence” during the Industrial Revolution.
How do historical contexts and colonial legacies impact current economic outcomes?
Colonial Institution Setup:
Colonizers often set up institutions based on their motivations and local conditions. In places with harsh
climates or high disease rates, extractive institutions
were established to exploit resources quickly.
Impact of Extractive Institutions:
In countries where extractive institutions were set up, economic policies often focused on resource extraction and wealth concentration, which led to long-term stagnation. For instance, regions in
Africa and South Asia
that experienced extractive colonial policies face lasting developmental challenges.
Path Dependence:
Colonial institutions created trajectories that persisted even after independence. Post-colonial governments often inherited the
same extractive structures,
leading to continued corruption, inequality, and weak rule of law.
Unequal Development:
Colonialism exacerbated regional disparities by favouring some areas
(urban centres, resource-rich regions)
over others, affecting infrastructure development and economic integration.
What criticisms exist regarding the theories proposed by the Nobel laureates?
Oversimplification of Institutional Role:
Critics argue that attributing economic success primarily to institutions might ignore other important factors, such as
culture, geography,
and international trade dynamics, which also significantly shape economic outcomes.
Neglect of Global Power Structures:
Some scholars believe that focusing on domestic institutions alone overlooks the influence of global economic structures and the power imbalances that exist between countries, which can perpetuate inequality.
Limited Consideration of Economic Policies:
Critics point out that macroeconomic policies, market dynamics, and state-led development strategies also play a crucial role in determining economic trajectories, beyond institutional quality alone.
Debate Over Inclusiveness of “Inclusive Institutions”:
Some argue that even countries with ostensibly inclusive institutions
(e.g., Western democracies)
can exhibit extractive practices, such as unequal wealth distribution, labor exploitation, and environmental degradation.
Way forward:
Strengthen Institutions with Reforms:
Focus on reforming political and economic institutions to promote inclusiveness, transparency, and rule of law, ensuring secure property rights and equal opportunities for all citizens.
Address Global Inequities and Support Development:
International efforts should aim to reduce global economic disparities by promoting fair trade, debt relief, and development aid.
**********Places in news: Jordan Valley
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Jordan River and its Valley
Why in the News?
Extremist groups held drone strikes on Israeli territory in the Jordan Valley (which forms Jordan’s border with Israel and the West Bank).
About Jordan Valley:
Details
Geography
• Part of the
Great Rift Valley
, extending from the
Sea of Galilee
to the
Dead Sea
• Forms a natural border between
, and the
• Low-lying, with parts below sea level, especially near the Dead Sea.
Climate
Semi-arid to arid
, with hot summers and mild winters.
• Limited rainfall, necessitating
irrigation
for agriculture.
Significance
• An essential
agricultural region
, growing citrus, dates, and vegetables.
• The
is a vital water source for agriculture and drinking water.
Ecological corridor
for migratory birds.
History
• Rich in
biblical and historical significance
, including
Jesus’ baptism
in the Jordan River.
• Archaeological sites from
ancient civilizations
like the Canaanites and Romans.
Geopolitical Aspects
• Critical in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict
, with strategic importance for
security
border control
• Vital for
Palestinian economic development
and a future state.
• Shared water resources create tensions between
Syria
Economic Activities
Agriculture
is the mainstay of the economy.
Tourism
is also significant due to religious and historical sites.
Environmental Concerns
Water scarcity
shrinking Dead Sea
due to river diversion are major issues.
Pollution
and overuse of the Jordan River affect water quality and ecosystem health.
PYQ:
[2015]
Which one of the following countries of South-West Asia does not open out to the Mediterranean Sea?
(a) Syria
(b) Jordan
(c) Lebanon
(d) Israel
**********UAE to review India’s concerns on surge in Silver, Platinum Alloy imports
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
India-UAE CEPA
Why in the News?
India has raised concerns over the increase in imports of silver products, platinum alloy, and dry dates
from the UAE
under the Free Trade Agreement (FTA).
Issues Raised by India:
The
Global Trade Research Initiative (GTRI)
has called for an
urgent review
of the
, citing concerns that the agreement allows
unlimited imports
gold, silver, platinum, and diamonds
with
zero tariffs
GTRI claims that many of these imports
do not meet Rules of Origin
requirements and thus should not qualify for
concessions
India’s gold and silver imports
from the UAE increased by
210%
$10.7 billion
2023-24
India allows
customs duty concessions
7% on silver
1% on 160 metric tonnes of gold
under the agreement.
India also requested that the
Indian Jewellery Exposition Centre in Dubai
be classified as a
Designated Zone
to allow
domestic jewellery manufacturers
to benefit from
concessional duties
, including those not registered under UAE’s domestic regulations.
India also requested the
to grant recognition to the
i-CAS (India Conformity Assessment Scheme) Halal scheme
to simplify the
certification process
and boost
exports of animal products
expressed its
willingness to review
this request after consulting
internal stakeholders
federal tax authorities
India-UAE Trade Relations:
Details
Volume
• The UAE is India’s
3rd largest trading partner
$83.65 billion
in bilateral trade in
• Trade between India and UAE grew from
$180 million in the 1970s
$85 billion in 2022-23
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA)
• Signed in
February 2022
, making India the first country to sign such an agreement with the UAE.
• CEPA has
slashed tariffs
80% of goods
and offers
zero duty access
90%
of Indian exports to the UAE.
Non-Oil Trade Target
• The target of reaching
$100 billion
in non-oil trade by
2030
is seen as
achievable
given current growth trends.
Investment from UAE
• UAE’s investments in India are around
$20-21 billion
, with
$15.5 billion
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA)
has invested in projects like the
NIIF Master Fund
renewable energy
initiatives.
India’s Exports to UAE
• UAE is India’s
2nd largest export destination
after the US, with exports worth
$31.61 billion
• Key exports include
petroleum products
gems
food items
textiles
engineering goods
India’s Imports from UAE
• UAE is a critical partner for
India’s energy security
• India imports
minerals
chemicals
from UAE.
4th largest crude oil
supplier and
2nd largest for LNG and LPG
PYQ:
[2022]
How will I2U2 (India, Israel, UAE and USA) grouping transform India’s position in global politics?
**********India-US conclude $3.5bn deal for 31 MQ-9B Armed UAVs
Security Issues
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
MQ-9B HALE UAV and its features
Why in the News?
India and the US concluded a $3.5 bn deal for the procurement of 31
armed High Altitude Long Endurance (HALE) Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
About MQ-9B HALE UAV
The MQ-9B drone is a version of the MQ-9 “Reaper” and has
two models
Sky Guardian
Sea Guardian.
It is built by the
General Atomics
This drone can fly over
40,000 feet high
, making it useful for watching the Himalayan border areas.
It can
stay in the air for up to 40 hours
, perfect for long surveillance missions.
The MQ-9B has advanced features like
automatic take-off and landing
, a system to avoid other objects, secure GPS, and encrypted communications.
Deployment:
The MQ-9B drones are planned to be deployed at four places, including
INS Rajaji near Chennai
Porbandar in Gujarat
, by the Indian Navy.
The other two services will keep them jointly at two bases in
Sarsawa
Gorakhpur
in Uttar Pradesh at Air Force bases due to
long runway requirements
Details of the Procurement:
is planning for
15 Sea Guardians
for the Indian Navy and
16 Sky Guardians
(eight each for the Indian Army and Air Force).
leased two MQ-9As
with the maiden flight taking place on
November 21, 2020.
As part of the deal, General Atomics will
establish
Global Maintenance, Repair, and Overhaul (MRO) facility in India
, contributing to offset obligations.
Significance of the deal
The SeaGuardian model can
help the Navy patrol large areas
more economically than manned aircraft.
For the Army and Air Force, these drones will help
monitor movements along the borders
, especially with China.
It can offer
80% of a manned aircraft’s capabilities
20% of the cost per hour
PYQ:
[2020]
What is the significance of Indo-US defence deals over Indo-Russian defence deals? Discuss with reference to stability in the Indo-Pacific region.
**********Article 142 of the Indian Constitution
Polity
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
The Supreme Court
declined a PIL
seeking directions under
to include
sexual offences against men, trans-persons, and animals in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS)
, which replaced the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
Supreme Court’s Observations
The petitioner argued that the new BNS
omitted Section 377
of the IPC, which previously criminalized ‘unnatural sex’ and carnal intercourse involving a man, woman, or animal.
In the
Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India (2018)
case, the Supreme Court struck down Section 377 to the extent that it criminalized
consensual sexual acts
between adults.
Non-consensual homosexual acts
remained punishable under this provision.
The BNS
does not include provisions
criminalizing
sexual offences against men, trans persons, and animals
During the hearing, the bench comprising
CJI DY Chandrachud
Justices JB Pardiwala
Manoj Misra
stated that:
The Court
cannot direct Parliament
to create or reintroduce an offence.
creation of offences
falls within the
parliamentary domain
, not under the court’s jurisdiction, even with
About
Article 142:
Details
Definition
• Grants
discretionary power
to the Supreme Court to pass orders or decrees necessary for
complete justice
in matters before it.
• Allows the court to act beyond the limits of statutory law if required.
Purpose
• Ensures
is delivered in cases where regular laws may not provide adequate remedies.
• Aims to empower the Supreme Court to address
extraordinary situations
effectively.
Key Clauses
Article 142(1)
: Allows the Supreme Court to pass enforceable orders across India for doing complete justice.
Article 142(2)
: Empowers the court to secure
attendance, discovery of documents, or punishment
for contempt.
Notable Cases
Bhopal Gas Tragedy (1989)
: Supreme Court awarded
$470 million
compensation, bypassing limitations of ordinary law.
Ayodhya Case (2019)
: Directed the formation of a trust for Ram Mandir construction.
Liquor Sale Ban (2016)
: Imposed a
500-metre ban
on liquor shops along highways using Article 142, extending it beyond central government orders.
Constructive Application
• Invoked for
environmental protection
, such as in the
Taj Mahal cleanup
Justice for undertrials
by addressing systemic delays in the judicial process.
Controversies
• Accusations of
judicial overreach
in certain cases, where actions have seemingly breached the
separation of powers
principle.
Supreme Court Bar Association v. Union of India
: Clarified that Article 142 should
supplement, not replace
the law.
Impact on Governance
• Empowers the Supreme Court with a tool for
upholding justice
, but raises debates over
checks and balances
in a democratic system.
PYQ:
[2019]
With reference to the Constitution of India, prohibitions or limitations or provisions contained in ordinary laws cannot act as prohibitions or limitations on the constitutional powers under Article 142. It could mean which one of the following?
(a) The decisions taken by the Election Commission of India while discharging its duties cannot be challenged in any court of law.
(b) The Supreme Court of India is not constrained in the exercise of its powers by laws made by the Parliament.
(c) In the event of grave financial crisis in the country, the President of India can declare Financial Emergency without the counsel from the Cabinet.
(d) State Legislatures cannot make laws on certain matters without the concurrence of Union Legislature.
**********