Telecommunications Act Pits Telecoms & OTTs Against Each Other
Why in the News?
Telecom operators and social media companies are in conflict over the interpretation of the new Telecommunication Act. Telecom operators are arguing that over-the-top (OTT) communication platforms like WhatsApp and Google Meet should be classified as telecom services under the Act.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Telecommunications Act, 2023 (Objective, Key Features, Issues, etc.)
About Telecommunications Act, 2023:
Earlier, the Indian Telecommunications sector was governed by three separate Acts of Parliament:
Indian Telegraph Act 1885
Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act 1933
Telegraph Wires, (Unlawful Protection) Act 1950
The Telecommunications Act, 2023 was brought in to consolidate these three separate Acts.
Aim
: To amend the existing laws governing the provision, development, expansion and operation of telecommunication services, telecom networks and infrastructure, in addition to assignment of spectrum.
Key Features of Telecommunications Act, 2023:
Authorisation for telecom-related activities
Prior authorisation from the central government will be required to:
(i) provide telecommunication services,
(ii) establish, operate, maintain, or expand telecommunications networks, or
(iii) possess radio equipment.
Assignment of spectrum
Spectrum will be assigned by auction, except for specified uses, where it will be allocated on an administrative basis.
Specified purposes include: (i) national security and defence, (ii) disaster management, (iii) weather forecasting, (iv) transport, (v) satellite services such as DTH and satellite telephony, and (vi) BSNL, MTNL, and public broadcasting services.
Powers of interception and search
Messages or a class of messages between two or more persons may be intercepted, monitored, or blocked on certain grounds.
Such actions must be necessary or expedient in the interest of public safety or public emergency, and must be in the interest of specified grounds.
Telecom services may be suspended on similar grounds.
An officer authorised by the government may search premises or vehicles for possession of unauthorised telecom network or equipment.
Protection of users
The central government may provide for measures to protect users which include:
(i) prior consent to receive specified messages such as advertising messages,
(ii) creation of Do Not Disturb registers, and
(iii) a mechanism to allow users to report malware or specified messages.
Entities providing telecom services must establish an online mechanism for registration and redressal of grievances.
Right of way
Entities laying telecommunication infrastructure may seek right of way over public or private property.
Right of way must be provided on a non-discriminatory and non-exclusive basis to the extent possible.
Appointments to TRAI
The Act amends the TRAI Act to also allow individuals with: (i) at least 30 years of professional experience to serve as the Chairperson, and (ii) at least 25 years of professional experience to serve as members.
Digital Bharat Nidhi
Universal Service Obligation Fund
has been established under the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 to provide for telecom services in underserved areas.
The Act retains this provision, renames the fund as Digital Bharat Nidhi, and also allows its use for research and development in telecom.
Offences and penalties
The Act specifies various criminal and civil offences.
Providing telecom services without authorisation, or gaining unauthorised access to a telecom network or data, are punishable with imprisonment up to three years, a fine up to two crore rupees, or both.
Breaching terms and conditions of authorisation is punishable with a civil penalty of up to five crore rupees.
Possessing unauthorised equipment, or using unauthorised network or service, is punishable with a penalty of up to ten lakh rupees.
Adjudication process
The central government will appoint an
adjudicating officer
to conduct inquiries and pass orders against civil offences under the Act.
The officer must be of the rank of joint secretary and above.
Key Issues with the Act:
Interception of communication
The Act provides that any message or class of messages between two or more persons may be intercepted, monitored, or blocked on specified grounds.
Such grounds include:
(i) the interest of the security of the state,
(ii) friendly relations with other countries,
(iii) public order, or
(iv) prevention of incitement of offences.
Telecom services may be suspended on similar grounds (e.g., internet shutdown).
The Act allows mass surveillance
The Act provides that any message or class of messages between two or more persons, or relating to any particular subject, may be subject to interception, monitoring, or blocking.
These actions will be subject to procedure and safeguards prescribed by the central government.
Using these grounds, an order may be made to intercept or monitor all communication where a particular word or set of words is used.
Such an order would require all communication of all users to be monitored.
Hence, this raises the question whether such actions could be considered proportionate to the objective.
Safeguards with regard to the power of search and seizure not specified
The Act allows any officer authorised by the central government to search a premise or vehicle on specified grounds.
The officer must have reason to believe that unauthorised telecommunications equipment or network used to commit an offence is kept or concealed.
The officer may also take possession of such equipment or network.
The Act neither specifies the procedure and safeguards against such actions, nor provides that such safeguards will be prescribed.
Need for biometric verification
The Act provides that telecom service providers must verify the identity of their users through any verifiable biometric-based identification.
This requirement may not be proportionate, and may infringe upon the fundamental right to privacy.
Telecommunications Act Pits Telecoms & OTTs Against Each Other:
Telecom operators and social media companies are in dispute over the interpretation of the new Telecommunication Act.
Telecom companies argue that over-the-top (OTT) communication platforms like WhatsApp and Google Meet should be classified as telecom services, requiring government licensing, just like traditional telecom services.
Despite the government's earlier clarification that OTT platforms do not fall under this definition, the telecom operators maintain their stance, citing the broad definition of telecom services in the Act.
This ongoing debate highlights the ambiguity in the Act's language and the differing interpretations by stakeholders.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  1.8 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********India’s Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme - Status and Challenges
Why in News?
India is on its way to achieve its target of blending 20% of petrol with ethanol by 2025-26. But concerns about fuel efficiency in existing vehicles and the food vs fuel debate still loom large over the ethanol economy.
What’s in Today’s Article?
About Ethanol (C2H5OH)
About the Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme
Status of Ethanol Production Capacity in India
Challenges Hanging Over India's Ethanol Economy
Way Ahead
About Ethanol (C2H5OH) and Ethanol Blending:
Ethanol is an
agricultural by-product
which is mainly obtained from the processing of sugar from sugarcane, but also from other sources such as rice husk or maize.
Since ethanol is produced from plants that harness the power of the sun, it is also considered as
renewable fuel.
In India,
ethanol is mainly produced from sugarcane molasses by fermentation process.
Ethanol is 99.9% pure alcohol
that can be blended with petrol.
To supplement ethanol supplies, the Government of India has permitted the procurement of ethanol produced from sources other than molasses, which is known as
first generation ethanol or 1G.
Aside from molasses, ethanol can be derived from rice straw, wheat straw, corn stover, bagasse, bamboo and woody biomass, which are known as
second generation ethanol sources or 2G.
India’s Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme:
About:
It was launched by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in
2003
to promote the use of alternative and environment friendly fuels.
This programme has been extended
to the whole of India (except UTs of Andaman Nicobar and Lakshadweep islands) with effect from
1st April, 2019
wherein Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) sell petrol blended with ethanol up to
10%.
The all-India average blending of ethanol with petrol has risen from 1.6% in 2013-14 to
11.8% in 2022-23
India's goal is to grow this ratio to 20%
by 2030, but when the NITI Aayog released the ethanol roadmap in 2021, that deadline was advanced to
20% by 2025-26 would mean producing some 1,000 crore litres of ethanol for blending with petrol.
Benefits of EBP programme:
It will reduce India’s import bill.
It will reduce environmental pollution.
It will increase farm income.
Biofuels demand least incremental investment for manufacturers.
Challenges when it comes to 20% ethanol blended fuel:
Engines would
need to be tweaked
so as to process petrol which has been blended with 20% ethanol.
Ethanol burns completely emitting nil CO2. However,
it does not reduce the emission of another key pollutant
- nitrous oxide.
Another source of contention is
inefficient land usage
in ethanol production and the
amount of water required to cultivate crops for ethanol.
Food security concerns,
given the uncertainties surrounding future output.
Status of Ethanol Production Capacity in India:
The Niti Aayog’s roadmap had laid down that
The capacity of sugarcane-based distilleries would need to increase from 426 crore litres in 2021 to 760 crore litres in 2026.
While grain-based distilleries’ capacity should increase from 258 to 740 crore litres.
Two interest subvention programmes
for establishing new distilleries had facilitated the ramping up of ethanol generation capacity.
Challenges Hanging Over India's Ethanol Economy:
Fuel vs. food debate:
In India, all the emphasis has been on
first generation (1G) ethanol
that is directly made from foodgrains and sugarcane.
For example
, sugarcane gives rise to three main related products - sugarcane juice and syrup, B-heavy molasses and C-heavy molasses, in the order of decreasing sugar content.
The first two would typically go to making sugar while the third will be used for ethanol production.
In a bid to up fuel ethanol production,
the government had started permitting the diversion of the first two away from sugar production to fuel ethanol
Concerns about agricultural sustainability:
Expanding sugarcane cultivation would redirect irrigation water from essential food-grain crops, exacerbating concerns about agricultural sustainability.
Rising import bill:
India ranks as a major maize producer globally, but domestic consumption consistently outpaces production.
This is also because maize has been used to produce more fuel ethanol to compensate for restrictions on using sugarcane products.
As a result,
maize import has increased
(from April to June 2024, the import is already worth $103 million) compared to last year.
More cultivation area to meet the 20% target:
As per NITI Aayog’s estimates,
some 4.8 million hectares will have to be added to maize
cultivation area to meet the 20% target, which is almost half of the typical maize cultivation area.
Fuel efficiency in existing vehicles:
The NITI Aayog report notes that ethanol brought down fuel efficiency in vehicles not suited for ethanol by an average of 6%.
Performance across states:
While the fuel ethanol pricing is the same across India, States determine the pricing of Extra Neutral Alcohol (ENA) that goes into making liquor for consumption and other uses.
In UP
, the government is fully aligned with the central government’s mission on ethanol and reserves ~25% of the ethanol for ENA.
In Tamil Nadu
, where liquor is a highly lucrative market for distilleries, fuel ethanol has not yet caught on as much.
Way Ahead:
The government should
diversify and move to 2G and 3G
ethanol that have less adverse effect on India’s food security.
Existing vehicles may have to go for an
engine retuning and change over
to E20 supported material.
As liquor revenue forms a large chunk of revenue of most state governments, many across the industry demand
an increase in ethanol pricing.
On the ethanol blending programme.pdf
( Size:  688.9 KB  )
Click to View More
Science & Tech
**********Task force for safety of medicos
Why in news?
The Supreme Court has constituted a national task force (NTF) of senior medical professionals to formulate comprehensive safety protocols for healthcare workers across India.
This decision comes in the wake of the rape and murder of a trainee doctor at RG Kar Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata, which has sparked widespread protests among the medical fraternity demanding enhanced safety measures.
The Supreme Court bench took suo motu cognisance of the case, emphasising the urgent need for a national consensus on standard safety protocols for medical professionals.
What’s in today’s article?
Current situation w.r.t safety protocols for healthcare workers across India
SC forms National Task Force
Current situation w.r.t safety protocols for healthcare workers across India
Legal provisions
As per constitutional provisions,
health and law and order are State subjects
Hence, it is the primary responsibility of the State government or Union Territory administration to take note of events and eventualities, and do what is necessary to prevent violence.
The details of the number of fatalities of medical professionals due to attacks by families of patients are not maintained centrally
Need for a safe work environment
Experts have pointed out that medical colleges often have ill-lit corridors, poorly secured wards, and long distances between departments.
There is an urgent need to improve working and living conditions by ensuring proper lighting, security guards, cameras, and manned walk-throughs between departments, operation theatres, and emergency areas.
These simple measures could make a real difference.
Examples from developed countries
Violence against healthcare workers is a global issue, but several countries have implemented effective measures to protect their medical professionals.
U.K.’s NHS
enforces a zero-tolerance policy on violence, supported by a dedicated security team and a comprehensive reporting system.
In the
U.S.,
some States classify assaults on healthcare workers as felonies, acting as a strong deterrent.
Australian hospitals
have introduced safety measures like security personnel, panic buttons, and mandatory de-escalation training.
India must urgently introduce a Central protection Act
and adopt similar measures to take stringent actions to ensure a safer environment for its healthcare workers.
The Supreme Court on Tuesday formed a 10-member National Task Force to make a blueprint for the safety and facility of healthcare workers at their workplace.
Members
The newly established NTF comprises a distinguished panel of medical experts from various specialisations, including:
Surgeon Vice-Admiral Aarti Sarin
Dr D Nageshwar Reddy
Dr M Shreenivas
Dr Pratima Murty
Dr Goverdhan Dutt Puri
Dr Saumitra Rawat
Anita Saxena
Pallavi Sapre, Dean
Dr Padma Srivastava
In addition to the core members, the NTF will also include ex officio members such as:
the Cabinet Secretary to the Government of India,
the Home Secretary,
the Secretary of the Union Health Ministry,
the Chairperson of the National Medical Commission, and
the President of the National Board of Examiners.
Responsibilities
The NTF has been tasked with the critical responsibility of devising an action plan to ensure the safety and well-being of medical professionals.
It will particularly focus on preventing gender-based violence and creating dignified working conditions for interns, resident doctors, and non-resident doctors.
Areas to be addressed:
The action plan will address several key areas, including:
Enhancing security in emergency rooms and other critical areas.
Implementing baggage screening to prevent the entry of arms.
Restricting the number of non-patient visitors.
Managing crowd control effectively.
Providing restrooms and gender-neutral spaces for medical staff.
Introducing biometric and facial recognition systems.
Improving lighting and installing CCTV in all hospital areas.
Arranging transport for medical professionals between 10 pm and 6 am.
Conducting workshops on handling grief and crisis situations.
Performing quarterly audits of institutional safety measures.
Establishing a police force commensurate with hospital footfall.
Applying the Prevention of Sexual Harassment (POSH) Act to medical establishments, ensuring the constitution of an Internal Complaints Committee (ICC).
Setting up an emergency helpline for medical professionals.
Task force for safety of medicos.pdf
( Size:  702.4 KB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Senior advocate designation
Why in news?
Recently, the Supreme Court designated 39 lawyers, including 10 women, as senior advocates. Notable among them are Indra Sawhney(linked to the pivotal 1992 ruling capping reservations at 50%), Shadan Farasat (Additional Advocate General of Punjab), BJP MP Bansuri Swaraj, and Anindita Pujari, Vice-President of the Bar Association of India.
These designations were made under new guidelines issued by a three-judge Bench in May 2023, which revised the 2018 guidelines for granting the 'senior advocate' designation.
What’s in today’s article?
Senior lawyer designation
Indira Jaising Case
2023 guidelines for designation of senior advocates in the SC
Senior advocates/lawyers in India
About
Under Section 16 of the
Advocates Act 1961
two classes of advocates are classified; Senior Advocate and Junior or those who are not designated as seniors.
The Senior advocates play the role of legal experts in India who have significant knowledge in the field of law.
They are associated with many prominent cases as they are good contributors to the principle of Rule of Law.
Legal provisions related to the Designation of Senior Counsel
Section 16(2) of the
Advocates Act, 1961
and Rule 2(a) of
Order IV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966
provide certain guidelines to be followed for the designation of a senior counsel.
As per these provisions:
The Chief Justice and other judges of the concerned court should believe that a particular advocate is fit to hold the position of a senior advocate.
The concerned advocate should have exceptional legal expertise and knowledge of the law.
The consent of such an advocate should be obtained prior.
The selection should be on the sole ground of his knowledge and expertise in the area of law.
Restrictions imposed on a Senior Advocate
A senior advocate is not permitted to appear without an Advocate-on-record or any junior.
He/she is refrained from drafting pleadings or affidavits before any court or authority mentioned under Section 30 of the act.
He/she shall not accept directly from a client any brief or instructions to appear in any Court.
A senior cannot file any pleading or represent his client neither can draft an application by his own handwriting.
The senior advocate must maintain a code of conduct, different from the other advocates.
India’s first woman Senior Advocate Indira Jaising filed a petition in SC challenging the existing process of designation.
She termed this process as opaque, arbitrary and fraught with nepotism and sought greater transparency in the process of designating.
As a result, the Apex Court decided to lay down guidelines for itself and all High Courts on the process of designating senior advocates.
Verdict in Indira Jaising Case
The judgment decided the setup:
A permanent committee, and
a permanent secretariat,
Secretariat was tasked with receiving and compiling all applications for designation with relevant data, information, and the number of reported and unreported judgments.
Besides creating permanent bodies, the verdict laid down the procedures and assessment criteria for the designation process.
New guidelines for designation of senior advocates in the SC
Background
In February 2023, the Central government sought to change guidelines for the designation of senior lawyers.
These guidelines were issued by the Supreme Court in the aftermath of its 2017 ruling in the case of ‘Indira Jaising vs. Union of India’.
The designation guidelines for lawyers are based on a point-based system, which awarded 40% weightage to publications, personality, and suitability gauged through the interview.
The Centre argued that this system is subjective, ineffective, and dilutes the esteem and dignity of the honour being conferred traditionally.
It pointed to the
rampant circulation of bogus and sham journals
where people can publish their articles without any academic evaluation of the contents and quality of the articles.
The Centre also sought to
reinstate the rule of a simple majority by a secret ballot
, where the judges can express their views about the suitability of any candidate without any embarrassment.
The existing guidelines discouraged the system of voting by secret ballot, except in cases where it was unavoidable.
In this backdrop, SC released a new guideline in May 2023.
Key highlights of the new guidelines
Minimum age to apply for the senior advocate designation
The new guidelines prescribe the minimum age as 45 years to apply for the ‘senior advocate’ designation.
This age limit may, however, be relaxed by the Committee, the Chief Justice of India, or a Supreme Court judge if they have recommended an advocate’s name.
The 2017 guidelines say that the CJI along with any judge can recommend an advocate’s name for designation.
However, the 2023 guidelines specify that the
CJI along with any Judge of the Supreme Court
may recommend in writing the name of an advocate for designation.
Marks set aside for publications
Earlier, the guidelines stated that 15 marks were set aside for publications.
However, the new guidelines state that only 5 marks will be given for:
publication of academic articles, experience of teaching assignments in the field of law, and
guest lectures delivered in law schools and professional institutions connected with law.
Weightage given to reported and unreported judgements
The weightage given to reported and unreported judgements (excluding orders that do not lay down any principle of law) has increased from 40 to 50 points in the new guidelines.
Senior advocate designation.pdf
( Size:  2.9 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********