What are Macrophages?
In a new paper published recently, a team of scientists describes the complex interplay between diseased liver cells and macrophages.
About Macrophages:
Macrophages are a
type of white blood cell
that plays an
important role in the human immune system.
They carry out various functions, including
engulfing and digesting microorganisms
clearing out debris and dead cells
, and
stimulating
other
cells involved in immune function.
The term macrophage is formed by the combination of the Greek terms "makro" meaning big, and "phagein" meaning eat.
Formation
form from monocytes
which
themselves derive
from the bone marrow.
Monocytes
circulate through the blood
for one to three days
before
migrating into tissues
, where they
become macrophages or dendritic cells
(i.e., a type of antigen presenting cell that plays a role in linking the innate and adaptive immunity).
Macrophages can be
found within many organs
in the body, including the liver, brain, bones, and lungs, as well as in the blood, particularly at sites of infection.
They are
essential for
the maintenance and
defence of host tissues
, doing so by
sensing and engulfing particulate matter
and, when necessary, initiating a pro-inflammatory response.
can modify themselves
different structures
in order to fight various different microbes and invaders.
In this way, macrophages
provide the first line of defense
in protecting the host from infection.
also involved in the development of
non-specific or
innate immunity.
This type of immunity is a
long-term immunity
which is acquired when a macrophage ingests a microbe and presents the microbe's antigen on its surface to alert other white blood cells to the presence of the invading particle.
Other white blood cells then multiply and amount an immune response against the pathogen.
produce a variety of cytokines
, which are
signaling molecules
communicate with other cells of the immune system
Macrophages may
have different names
according
to where they function
in the body.
For example,
in the brain are termed microglia,
liver sinusoids
, they are
called Kupffer cells.
Click to View More
Source :
Macrophage mix helps determine rate and fate of fatty liver disease, study finds
Science & Tech
**********What is Gongronema sasidharanii?
Gongronema sasidharanii, a new species of plant, was recently discovered from Pampadum Shola National Park in Kerala.
About Gongronema sasidharanii:
It is a
new species of plant discovered in Pampadum Shola National Park
, Idukki District,
It is a plant with
smooth stems
and
small urn-shaped
creamy white to purplish-green
flowers
This is also the
first time the genus
is being
reported from south India.
In India, the genus Gongronema has so far been represented by just three species found in northeast India, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, and West Bengal.
Key Facts about Pampadum Shola National Park:
It is located in the
eastern part of the Southern Western Ghats
in Idukki District,
Stretching over an area of around 12 sq km, the name 'Pampadum Shola' literally means ‘the forest where the snake dances’.
The terrain is undulating with hillocks of varying heights. The altitudes range between 1600-2400 m.
The park experiences a
misty and cloudy climate throughout the year,
and it receives
heavy rain during
North-East monsoon.
Vegetation
: It houses
evergreen forests, moist deciduous forests,
shola grasslands,
semi-evergreen
Flora
: It is host to 22 species of trees, 74 species of herbs and shrubs, and 16 species of climbers.
Fauna:
Tigers
leopards
, giant
gizzard squirrels
, the rarely spotted
flying squirrels,
Nilgiri Tahr,
and spotted deer.
Nilgiri marten
only species of marten found in South India
, can also be spotted here.
Around
100 species of butterflies
have been recorded at the park.
Click to View More
Source :
Plant found in Idukki identified as new species of genus Gongronema
Environment
**********What are Glacial Lakes?
The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) has finalised a list of 189 “high-risk” glacial lakes for mitigation measures to reduce the risk emanating from them.
About Glacial Lakes:
A glacial lake is a
body of water
that
originates from a glacier.
It
typically forms at the foot of a glacier
, but may form on, in, or under it.
ISRO categorised glacial lakes into
four broad categories
based on how they were formed —
moraine-dammed, ice-dammed, erosion-based, and ‘others’.
How do glacial lakes form?
As
glaciers
move, they
erode the terrain under them
leaving depressions
and grooves on the land.
When they churn up rock and soil, they
etch ridges of debris known as moraines.
Most glacial lakes form when a
glacier retreats
meltwater fills the hole
left behind.
However,
natural dams
formed out of ice and terminal moraines
, can
also form glacial lakes.
An
ice dam forms when
surging glacier,
which can move up to 100 times faster than an average glacier, may
dam up meltwater as it closes off a valley or fjord
and prevents it from draining.
Dams
by moraines can be dense and stable
holding sizable lakes behind
for years.
They
can also be leaky
allowing
lake to drain slowly into nearby rivers
Glacial lakes are
crucial sources of freshwater for rivers
However, they also
pose significant risks
, specifically of
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs).
GLOFs occur when glacial lakes release large volumes of meltwater due to the failure of natural dams, resulting in sudden and severe flooding downstream.
Click to View More
Source :
NDMA to monitor 189 high-risk glacial lakes to prevent disasters
Geography
**********What is Quantum Nonlocality?
Scientists have demonstrated that a universal standard for measuring and quantifying non-local quantum correlations is not possible.
About Quantum Nonlocality:
While
classical physics assumes locality
, the principle of
nonlocality
a feature of
many interpretations of
quantum mechanics.
Nonlocality describes the apparent
ability of objects to instantaneously know about
each other’s state
even
when
separated by large distances
(potentially even billions of light years), almost as if the universe at large instantaneously arranges its particles in anticipation of future events.
Thus, in the quantum world,
despite
what Einstein
had established
about the
speed of light being the maximum
speed for anything in the universe,
action or
transfer of information
does
appear to be possible.
This is in
direct contravention of the "principle of locality
" (or what Einstein called the "principle of local action"),
the idea
that distant objects cannot have direct influence on one another,
and that an object is directly influenced only by its immediate surroundings, an idea on which almost all of physics is predicated.
occurs due to the phenomenon of entanglement
, whereby
interact with each other
become permanently correlated
, or dependent on each other’s states and properties, to the extent that they
effectively lose their individuality
and, in many ways,
behave as a single entity.
Nonlocality suggests that the "
separate" parts of the universe
are actually
potentially connected
in an intimate and immediate way.
Click to View More
Source :
New study on quantum nonlocality expands scope of its use
Science & Tech
**********What is the Joint Consultative Machinery (JCM)?
For the first time in the last 10 years, the Prime Minister will meet the staff representatives in the national-level Joint Consultative Mechanism (JCM) of the Union government employees and the Personnel Ministry.
About Joint Consultative Machinery (JCM):
It is a
platform for constructive dialogue
between the representatives of the staff side and the official side for peaceful
resolution of all disputes between the Government as
employer and the employees.
The scheme was introduced in 1966 with the objectives of promoting harmonious relations and securing the greatest measure of cooperation between the Central Government as the employer and the employees.
The scheme is a
non-statutory one mutually agreed
upon
between the staff side
the official side.
covers all regular civil employees of
Central Government, except:
Class-I services
;
Class-II services
, other than the Central Secretariat Services and the other comparable services in the headquarters organization of the Government;
Persons in industrial establishments
employed mainly
in managerial or administrative capacity
, and those who are being employed in supervisory capacity drawing salary going beyond grade pay of Rs.4200/- per month;
Employees of
Union Territories;
Police personnel.
Joint Councils:
The scheme provides for the setting up of
joint councils at
National, Departmental and Regional / Office levels.
National Council
chaired by
Cabinet Secretary
, is the
apex body.
The scope of the Joint Councils
includes all matters
relating
to conditions of service and work
, welfare of employees, and improvement of efficiency and
standards of work
provided
, however, that
in regard to matters of recruitment, promotion, and discipline, consultation is limited to matters of general principles only, and
individual cases are not considered
deals
only with
matters affecting Central Government employees
generally, such as pay of common categories of staff, allowances, etc.,
Departmental Council
with matters affecting only the
Ministries/Departments concerned.
Office/Regional Councils
deal with regional or
local issues only.
Click to View More
Source :
PM Modi to meet unions of govt. employees
Polity & Governance
**********Govt bans 156 fixed dose combination drugs
Why in news?
The Union Health Ministry has banned 156 fixed dose combination (FDC) medicines, citing "no therapeutic justification" and potential risks to patients.
FDC drugs combine multiple active ingredients, which can be helpful for conditions like tuberculosis and diabetes but may also deliver unnecessary or harmful components.
What’s in today’s article?
Fixed Dose Combination (FDC) Drugs – About, Utility, Benefits, Challenges, etc.
156 fixed dose combination drugs banned
Fixed Dose Combination (FDC) Drugs:
Combination products, also known as fixed dose drug combinations (FDCs), are combinations of two or more active drugs in a single dosage form.
They are also referred to as cocktail drugs.
The Food and Drug Administration, USA defines a combination product as ‘
a product composed of any combination of a drug and a device or a biological product and a device or a drug and a biological product or a drug, device, and a biological product
’.
It is widely accepted that most drugs should be formulated as single compounds.
Acceptability
Fixed ratio combination products are acceptable only when –
The dosage of each ingredient meets the requirement of a defined population group and
The combination has a proven advantage over single compounds administered separately in therapeutic effect, safety or compliance.
Advantages of FDC Drugs
FDC formulations have unique advantages such as complementary mechanism of action,
synergistic effects
better tolerability
elongated product life-cycle management
cost savings
Use of FDCs is a rational approach for achieving optimal therapeutic benefits while minimizing pill-burden.
Challenges/Demerits of FDC Drugs
There are increased chances of adverse drug effects and drug interactions compared with both drugs given individually.
Unfortunately, many FDCs being introduced in India are usually irrational.
The most pressing concern with irrational FDCs is that
they expose patients to unnecessary risk of adverse drug reactions
Irrational FDCs also impose unnecessary
financial burden on consumers
Medical practitioners who patronize such combinations could be the centre of controversy when subjected to litigation in consumer forums.
This is due to the fact that these combinations do not find mention in standard text or reference books and reputed medical journals.
Pharmaceutical manufacturers, however, continue to reap the benefits of huge sales, and therefore continue to promote combinations with vigour
About the news
The government has banned 156 fixed-dose combination (FDC) medicines, including antibiotics for fevers and colds, painkillers, and multivitamins, citing potential risks to human health.
The Union Health Ministry issued a gazette notification under
Section 26 A of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act of 1940
, prohibiting the manufacture, sale, and distribution of these medicines.
The ban follows recommendations from an expert committee and the Drugs Technical Advisory Board (DTAB), both of which found no therapeutic justification for the ingredients in these FDCs.
Key highlights
The banned drugs include common combinations like anti-allergic medicines with nasal decongestants, antibiotics with acne creams, and migraine medicines with anti-nausea drugs.
Notably, the ban also includes the mefenamic acid-tranexamic acid combination and sildenafil with blood vessel relaxants.
This is the largest crackdown on FDCs since 2016 when 344 drugs were banned, a decision later upheld for 328 combinations in 2018.
Some pre-1988 drugs previously exempt from the ban are now included, which has surprised the pharmaceutical industry, raising concerns about the immediate withdrawal of these long-used products from the market.
Govt bans 156 fixed dose combination drugs.pdf
( Size:  1.2 MB  )
Click to View More
Social Issues
**********A look at Ongoing Indian Space Missions
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background (Context of the Article)
Key Achievements Post-Chandrayaan-3
Road Maps & Future Plans (Private Sector, Regulatory Updates, etc.)
Background:
After the successful landing of Chandrayaan-3 on the moon, India's space program has continued to make significant strides, even though activities at the Sriharikota spaceport have been relatively quiet.
Key Achievements Post-Chandrayaan-3:
Aditya L1 Mission:
Launched on September 2, 2023, this solar science mission reached its orbit around the Earth-Sun Lagrange point (L1) by January 2024, marking a crucial step in solar observation.
Gaganyaan TV-D1:
The first abort mission for India’s human spaceflight mission, Gaganyaan, successfully tested the Crew Escape System on October 21, 2023, showcasing the readiness for future manned missions.
XPoSat:
Launched on January 1, 2024, this satellite is India’s second space-based observatory dedicated to studying polarized radiation from space, enhancing our understanding of cosmic phenomena.
INSAT-3DS:
This meteorological satellite, launched on February 17, 2024, is vital for proving the reliability of ISRO’s Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV), especially before the upcoming NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) mission.
Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV-TD):
ISRO conducted successful landing experiments for its scaled-down Reusable Launch Vehicle, laying the groundwork for future orbital return flight tests.
Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV):
With the successful third development flight on August 16, 2024, ISRO has completed the development phase of SSLV, enabling its transfer to industry for broader use.
Roadmaps and Future Plans:
Gaganyaan Program:
India is focusing heavily on its human spaceflight program, with astronaut candidates undergoing advanced training. The first uncrewed Gaganyaan mission is expected by late 2024, with a crewed mission planned thereafter.
Next-Generation Launch Vehicle (NGLV):
ISRO is developing a new heavy-lift launch vehicle to support its ambitious goals, including a future Indian space station and extensive lunar exploration.
Lunar Exploration:
ISRO has a 25-year roadmap for lunar exploration, including plans for an Indian on the moon by 2040 and long-duration lunar missions.
Involvement of NewSpace India Ltd. (NSIL):
NSIL has been assigned the responsibility for conducting space missions and managing commercial activities.
This includes collaborations with SpaceX for satellite launches and the development of the LVM-3 rocket in partnership with private entities.
Private Sector Participation:
Agnikul Cosmos:
Successfully launched its SoRTeD-01 vehicle, marking the first use of a semi-cryogenic engine in India.
Skyroot Aerospace and Others:
Private companies are making significant progress in developing launch vehicles and space technologies, with upcoming missions like Vikram 1.
Regulatory Updates:
IN-SPACe:
India’s new space regulatory body has been active, issuing important guidelines and licenses, including allowing 100% FDI in space sectors with specific ceilings in certain areas.
Overall, India’s space program is rapidly evolving, with a strong emphasis on research, development, and collaboration with private companies to achieve its ambitious space exploration goals.
Since Chandrayaan-3, what has India’s space programme been up to.pdf
( Size:  277.4 KB  )
Click to View More
Science & Tech
**********Internship Initiatives to Match Skill Sets with Opportunity in India
Why in News?
Under a special package outlined in the Union Budget 2024–25,
a new portal
is being developed to allow youth to apply directly for internships with the nation's top 500 enterprises.
The portal will be made available to potential applicants once the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) releases the guidelines for the
internship scheme
(announced in the Budget).
What’s in Today’s Article?
About the Internship Scheme Announced in the Union Budget 2024-25
Highlights of the Portal that will Enable Youth to Apply Directly for Internship
About the Internship Scheme Announced in the Union Budget 2024-25:
Background:
The Union Budget 2024-25 had announced the PM’s Package for Employment and Skilling with an overall outlay of Rs 2 lakh crore.
The internship scheme was announced (in the Budget) after the issue of unemployment became contentious during the Lok Sabha polls held earlier this year.
Description of the scheme:
Objective:
In an effort to close the skills gap and help young people find their first jobs, the government would offer one crore youth internships in 500 of the top companies in five years.
The government is keen to ensure that those at the margins, especially those less skilled and less employable, are able to make the most of this internship scheme.
Allowance:
An internship allowance of Rs 5,000 per month along with a one-time assistance of Rs 6,000 will be provided to interns.
Funding:
Companies will be required to use their corporate social responsibility (CSR) funding to cover the training cost and 10% of the internship cost.
The scheme is projected to cost over Rs 66,000 crore, and each company would have to shell out over Rs 13 crore for it.
Concerns:
Although the industry has generally welcomed the internship scheme, certain questions have been raised.
For example,
the eligibility criteria for companies and interns to be selected as part of the plan.
Whether it will be mandatory (for companies) and the basic qualifications an individual needs to have to qualify as a beneficiary.
Solution:
The government plans to talk to the top 500 companies and mutually agree on
a voluntary quota system
for taking on board interns.
The quota system would be based on the CSR expenditure of these companies.
Highlights of the Portal that will Enable Youth to Apply Directly for Internship:
How will it work?
The idea is not to upload any existing database of the country’s youth on the portal, because some may not want to participate in this internship scheme.
Rather, the employers will post their internship openings, and these will be matched with the data submitted by the candidates, enabling a free flow of information on the portal.
The portal will facilitate matching of skill sets of the applicants with the type of internship opportunities provided by the companies.
Internship portal in the works, will match skill sets with opportunity.pdf
( Size:  2.0 MB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********Significance of PM Modi’s visit to Kyiv
Why in news?
Today, PM Modi will hold talks with Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Kyiv. Modi will be the first Indian prime minister to visit Ukraine after diplomatic relations were established in 1992.
What’s in today’s article?
Why is PM Modi going to Ukraine?
A break from India’s traditional foreign policy stance on Ukraine
Impact of this visit on India’s relations with Russia
To reinforce India's foreign policy of strategic autonomy
PM Modi's visit to Kyiv could be seen as a response to the backlash India faced after Modi's visit to Moscow, which coincided with rising tensions due to the Ukraine conflict.
The visit is aimed at reinforcing India's foreign policy of strategic autonomy and countering the perception of India's over-reliance on Russia.
To extend support for Ukraine’s sovereignty
This visit may also serve as a gesture of support for Ukraine’s sovereignty, as it coincides with Ukraine's Independence Day.
India's potential role as a mediator in the Ukraine conflict
This is highlighted by its balanced relationships with the G7, Russia, and the Global South.
Ukraine, lacking substantial support from these regions in peace efforts, sees India's involvement as crucial.
Kyiv's recent diplomatic engagements with countries like China and India's planned visit suggest an effort to find an effective mediator for negotiations with Russia.
India's unique position, viewed as equidistant from major global powers, makes it a strong candidate for facilitating peace talks.
PM Modi's Visit to Kyiv: A Shift in India's Traditional Foreign Policy on Ukraine?
Departure from India’s traditional foreign policy stance
India's traditional foreign policy has been closely aligned with the Soviet Union during the Cold War,
a relationship that continued with Russia but did not extend to Ukraine after its independence in 1991
Similarly, India's engagement with Poland diminished after the Warsaw Pact's dissolution and Poland's shift towards the West.
The ongoing visit of Prime Minister Modi to Ukraine and Poland signals a
significant departure from India's historical bias towards Russia
and marks a new chapter in India's engagement with central and eastern Europe.
Reasons behind this departure
Bilateral relations between India and Ukraine suffered significantly after the Russia-Ukraine war began in February 2022, with trade volume dropping from $3.39 billion in 2021-22 to less than $1 billion in the following two years.
Despite this, the conflict has opened
new opportunities for India to engage with Ukraine
India's leadership, including PM Modi, has
maintained strategic balance
while increasing direct engagement with Ukrainian counterparts through meetings at multilateral forums and bilateral discussions.
India's External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar and National Security Advisor Ajit Doval have also been in regular contact with Ukrainian officials.
The possibility of
post-war reconstruction presents significant opportunities for India, including in defence industrial cooperation
Ukraine's agricultural strength
, especially as a major source of sunflower oil, adds to its strategic importance for India in the future.
Not a reflection of weakening ties with Russia
India's engagement with Ukraine is not a reflection of weakening ties with Russia, despite the discourse suggesting otherwise.
India's international actions are driven by its own agency as a confident and powerful nation, not by a need to appease or distance itself from Russia.
Framing Prime Minister Modi's visit to Ukraine as either an abandonment of Russia or a "redemption tour" post his Moscow visit overlooks India's independent capacity to navigate international relations.
Common interests will always guide international relations
India's strong relationship with Russia, including cooperation in areas like military hardware and economic support, continues despite Russia's engagement with China, India's main geopolitical rival.
Similarly, India's engagement with Ukraine will not alter its relationship with Russia.
Common interests guide international relations, and India's desire to play a peacemaking role, as indicated by PM Modi in Warsaw, requires engagement with all relevant parties, including Ukraine.
Significance of PM Modi’s visit to Kyiv.pdf
( Size:  2.5 MB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Building on favourable change in the 2024 Waqf Bill  
Polity
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Joint Parliamentary Committee (JPC); Waqf Board Act;
Mains level:
Role of Waqf Board;
Why in the News?
The Waqf Bill 2024, also known as the
Waqf (Amendment) Bill,
has been referred to a
after allies of the Narendra Modi government expressed reluctance to pass it immediately, and opposition parties voiced criticism of the Bill.
Concerns Acknowledged by the JPC
Inclusion of Non-Muslims:
The proposal to include
non-Muslim members in state waqf boards
has faced significant opposition. Critics argue that this
undermines the religious autonomy of Muslim institutions,
similar provisions do not exist
for
Hindu temples
or other religious bodies.
Increased Authority of District Collectors:
The Bill grants
more powers to district collectors,
allowing them to
arbitrate disputes over waqf properties.
This has raised concerns about potential government overreach and the effectiveness of local waqf boards in managing properties.
Impact on Inheritance Rights:
The proposed changes could affect the inheritance rights of heirs, particularly women, by allowing the creation of
family waqfs that may not fully comply with Islamic inheritance laws.
This raises questions about
fairness and equity in the distribution of waqf assets.
The rationale of the family waqt:
Family waqf
is rooted in the
Islamic principle
charity begins at home
The Quran
encourages spending money on parents and relatives (2:215),
Prophet Muhammad
emphasised the
importance of spending on one’s family as a
highly rewarded act of charity.
Potential for Misuse:
There are fears that the amendments could lead to the
misuse of waqf properties
, exacerbating existing
issues of encroachment and mismanagement
, rather than effectively addressing them.
Newly Proposed Section 3A(2)
Key Features:
This section stipulates that a Muslim can create a
family waqf only concerning one-third of their property
if excluding heirs, and it prohibits the
complete exclusion of female heirs.
However, it allows for the
possibility of token benefits being granted to female heirs,
which could still result in unequal distributions.
Concerns:
Critics argue that this provision
may not sufficiently protect women’s rights under Islamic inheritance laws,
as it could permit arrangements that do not provide equitable benefits to female heirs compared to their male counterparts.
Implementation of Waqf Boards Worldwide
India:
India has
30 waqf boards,
each responsible for
managing waqf properties within their respective states.
These boards oversee
approximately 900,000 properties
, with a focus on ensuring that waqf assets are used for charitable purposes.
Middle Eastern Countries:
In many Middle Eastern nations,
waqf properties are often managed by government-appointed bodies,
and the legal framework tends to be more integrated with Islamic law. For instance, in countries like
Egypt
Turkey, waqf management is closely tied to state regulations,
which can vary significantly from those in India.
Colonial impact:
The evolution of waqf laws has been influenced by colonial histories, with some countries, such as
Egypt and Tunisia
, abolishing family waqfs altogether, while others, like
Malaysia and Indonesia
, have maintained them with varying degrees of regulation.
Way forward:
Strengthen Waqf Governance
: Ensure robust oversight and accountability of waqf boards by balancing state involvement with respect for religious autonomy. This includes safeguarding the inheritance rights of heirs, particularly women, and preventing government overreach while maintaining effective management of waqf properties.
Promote Inclusivity and Equity
: Amend the Waqf Bill to address concerns about the inclusion of non-Muslims in waqf boards and ensure equitable distribution of waqf assets in line with Islamic inheritance laws.
**********How South China Sea tensions pose a threat to international trade? 
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
South China Sea;
Mains level:
Significance of South China Sea;
Why in the News?
Tensions between China and the Philippines have sharply escalated after a violent clash between their sailors in the South China Sea (SCS) last week. Currently, escalating tensions in the South China Sea are heightening global security concerns over this vital trade route.
How Important is the South China Sea for World Trade?
About a
third of global maritime trade passes
through the
3.5 million square kilometre South China Sea annually, according to
UNCTAD.
Around
40% of petroleum products traded globally
are delivered via the South China Sea
every year.
In 2016, an estimated
$3.4 trillion to $3.6 trillion worth of goods and commodities
travelled the seaway.
Tens of thousands of cargo vessels
move through the South China Sea every year, carrying around
40% of China’s, one-third of India’s and 20% of Japan’s trade
with the rest of the world.
The South China Sea is a vital crossroads for both
intra-Asian trade as well as for commerce with the rest of the world
, especially
Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
What makes the South China Sea such a Controversial Issue?
Beijing claims almost
all of the South China Sea as its own
, angering its neighbours who say China’s territorial ambitions
cut into their exclusive economic zones.
ignored a 2016 ruling by an international arbitration court
that Beijing has
no legal or historical basis
for its expansive claims under
international law.
The Chinese military has staged increasingly
aggressive actions in the seaway recently,
including
clashes with Filipino ships
, fueling fears of a full-scale conflict.
Vietnam and the Philippines have filed claims with the
UN for extended continental shelves
in the South China Sea.
Concerns that Beijing
may use military force to bring Taiwan
under its control have further raised tensions in the region.
Why is the South China Sea Contested?
Availability of Natural gas and oil:
The South China Sea is estimated to
hold about 5.38 trillion cubic meters
of proven and probable natural gas and 11 billion barrels of oil reserves.
Rare earth elements:
The disputed waters also contain large
deposits of rare-earth minerals crucial to China’s technological ambitions,
including electric vehicle batteries and advanced electronics.
Some estimates suggest the
Pacific Ocean
contains a
thousand times more rare-earth minerals than the currently known land reserves
, more than half of which are controlled by China.
Biggest Chokepoint in the South China Sea
Malacca Strait
, which lies between
Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore
, is considered the biggest chokepoint in the South China Sea.
Last year,
23.7 million barrels of oil and petroleum products
were moved through the strait per day,
13% higher than through the Strait of Hormuz.
The Malacca Strait is just
64 kilometers wide at its narrowest point and is already vulnerable to congestion and collisions.
Experts predict that if China invades Taiwan, the U.S. and its allies
could blockade the Malacca Strait,
limiting China’s access to oil and exports
What should India do? (Way forward)
Enhance Strategic Partnerships:
India should strengthen its
maritime collaborations with key regional players like ASEAN nations, Japan, and Australia
while
deepening its involvement
in forums such as the
Quad
to promote a
rules-based order
in the Indo-Pacific and ensure
freedom of navigation
Bolster Naval Capabilities:
India should continue to
modernize and expand its naval presence
in the Indo-Pacific, focusing on
securing critical sea lanes and chokepoints like the Malacca Strait
to safeguard its trade routes and energy supplies in the event of escalating tensions.
Mains PYQ:
South China Sea has assumed great geopolitical significance in the present context. Comment.
(2016)
**********Dealing with Death at Work    
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Safety Law and Guidelines; Importance of Safety Audits;
Why in the News?
On August 21, 2024, a deadly explosion at the Escientia plant in Atchutapuram SEZ killed 17 workers and injured over 50, triggered by a solvent leak involving MTBE. The incident, part of a troubling safety trend, has prompted a government inquiry and calls for stricter safety regulations, particularly due to the exemption from regular inspections for SEZ units.
Previous Incidents:
This accident is part of a troubling pattern, as it follows another
major explosion in the same SEZ last year
, and recalls a deadly styrene vapour leak incident in 2020 that killed 12 people.
Government Response:
The Andhra Pradesh government has ordered a
high-level inquiry into the incident. Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu
has expressed condolences and promised support for the victims’ families.
Preventing Future Accidents:
Regular safety audits can help
identify potential hazards and ensure compliance
with safety regulations, reducing the risk of catastrophic incidents.
Accountability:
Audits enforce accountability among
management to adhere to safety standards
, promoting a culture of safety within organizations.
Regulatory Compliance:
Conducting safety audits
helps organizations ensure compliance with local, state, and national safety regulations.
Public Trust:
Enhancing safety measures and transparency can
restore public confidence in industrial operations,
particularly in regions prone to industrial accidents.
Safety Law and Guidelines:
Factories Act, 1948
: Governs worker safety in factories,
mandating safety audits and safety officer appointments.
Requires safety committees with management and employee reps to address hazards.
IS 14489:1998
: Provides guidelines for
occupational safety and health audits
, focusing on compliance, deviations, and safety management effectiveness across sectors.
Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020
: Consolidates labor laws, mandates regular safety
audits for hazardous processes, and grants inspectors authority to enforce compliance.
CIMAH Rules
: Require industries with
hazardous processes to prepare safety reports and conduct regular audits to prevent major accidents,
enforced by state safety authorities.
Integrated Guidance Framework for Chemicals Safety
: Offers guidance for safety audits in handling hazardous chemicals, emphasizing c
ompliance with MSIHC Rules and robust audit practices.
Note:
is an Indian Standard titled
“Code of Practice on Occupational Safety and Health Audit.”
It provides comprehensive guidelines for conducting occupational safety and health audits in various workplaces.
Way forward:
Implement Regular Safety Audits
: Enforce routine safety audits for all industrial units, including SEZs, to identify hazards and ensure compliance with safety standards, thus preventing future incidents and promoting a culture of safety.
Strengthen Regulatory Oversight
: Close regulatory gaps by applying safety standards uniformly across all sectors, including exempted units, and enhance transparency and accountability in safety practices to restore public trust.
**********A look at ongoing Indian Space Missions
Science Tech
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Various space missions mentioned
Mains level:
NA
Why in the News?
Since Chandrayaan 3’s successful moon landing on August 23, 2023 and its declaration of
National Space Day
, ISRO has remained highly active with several key missions, despite a quieter phase at Sriharikota.
Key Missions and Milestones:
Details
Date
Successful Moon landing by Vikram lander.
declared as India’s National Space Day.
Aditya L1
Solar science mission to study the Sun.
Reached Earth-Sun
L1 point
on January 6, 2024.
Studied
solar storm
in May 2024.
Launched: September 2, 2023
L1 Orbit: January 6, 2024
Gaganyaan TV-D1
First abort mission
for Gaganyaan program.
Tested Crew Escape System (CES);
crew module recovered by INS Shakthi.
October 21, 2023
XPoSat
X-ray Polarimeter Satellite to study radiation polarization.
Second such space observatory
after NASA’s IPEX.
Launched: January 1, 2024
INSAT-3DS
Meteorological satellite launched to support GSLV credibility for
NISAR mission
Enhances weather forecasting capabilities.
Launched: February 17, 2024
RLV-TD (Pushpak)
Reusable Launch Vehicle
tests (LEX-02 and LEX-03) conducted.
Simulated landing conditions for future Orbital Return Flight.
LEX-02: March 22, 2024
LEX-03: June 7, 2024
SSLV
Final development flight of
Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV).
Successfully placed EOS-08 and SR-0 Demosat in orbit.
August 16, 2024
ISRO Roadmaps
25-year roadmap until 2047
Plans for crewed lunar missions, sample-return missions, and the
Bharatiya Antariksh Station
(BAS) by 2035.
Announced: December 2023
Next-Generation Launch Vehicle (NGLV)
New 3-stage launch vehicle
under development to replace GSLV.
Powered by
semi-cryogenic, liquid, and cryogenic engines.
Project report submitted to Union Cabinet.
Project report submitted: February 2024
NSIL Missions
Agreement with SpaceX
for GSAT-20/GSAT-N2 launch.
SSLV launch
service agreement with an Australian company.
Private Space Missions
Agnikul Cosmos
SoRTeD-01
, first
semi-cryogenic engine
vehicle from Indian soil.
Skyroot
Dhruva Space
progressing with tests and launches.
IN-SPACe Initiatives
Released
‘Norms, Guidelines, and Procedures for Authorisation of Space Activities’.
Granted first satellite broadband
license
to Eutelsat
OneWeb
first ground station
service license to Dhruva Space.
100 % Direct FDI policy
**********[pib] World Audio Visual & Entertainment Summit (WAVES)
Governance
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
Union Minister of Information and Broadcasting
has launched
25 challenges
as part of the
‘Create in India Challenge – Season 1’ for the World Audio Visual & Entertainment Summit (WAVES).
About WAVES
It is an
international summit
organized by the
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Government of India
The
first edition
will take place from
20-24 November 2024
Goa
The summit will be hosted in
in collaboration with the
State Government of Goa
Entertainment Society of Goa
will act as the
Nodal Agency
for the event, following an MOU with Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
It is supported by industry partners like the
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI)
and the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
Purpose:
WAVES aims to be a pivotal forum for fostering dialogue, trade collaboration, and innovation within the evolving media and entertainment industry.
The summit will showcase India as a hub for innovation and excellence in the media and entertainment sector, attract investments, and position India as a global leader in the entertainment business.
Location & Collaboration:
WAVES is designed
to promote sustainable growth
in the media and entertainment industry.
It will help
attract global trade and investment to India
, positioning the country as a key player in the
global entertainment landscape
bring together industry leaders, stakeholders, and innovators
to explore new opportunities, tackle challenges, and shape the future of the sector.
PYQ:
[2014]
Though 100 percent FDI is already allowed in non-news media like a trade publication and general entertainment channel, the government is mulling over the proposal for increased FDI in news media for quite some time. What difference would an increase in FDI make? Critically evaluate the pros and cons.
**********In news: Gumti River
Enviro & Biodiversity
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
India has refuted allegations that the
recent floods
eastern Bangladesh
were caused by the opening of the
Dumbur dam over Gumti River in Tripura.
About Gumti River
Details
Origin
Dumboor Lake,
Tripura, India
Length
Approximately 150 kilometers
Course
Flows southward
through
, India, and then into Bangladesh;
Joins the
Meghna River
Tributaries
Left:
Raima, Manu
Right:
Deo, Khowai
Terrain
Hilly terrain in upper course, fertile plains in lower course
Supports diverse flora and fauna
Projects Installed
Gumti Hydroelectric Project:
Located near Dumbur; Generates hydroelectric power in Tripura; Bangladesh also receives 40 MW.
Gumti Irrigation Project:
Supports irrigation for agriculture in Tripura, India
PYQ:
[2014]
Consider the following rivers:
Barak
Lohit
Subansiri
Which of the above flows / flow through Arunachal Pradesh?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
**********Why has Malaysia tweaked its ‘Orangutan Diplomacy’?
Enviro & Biodiversity
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
Malaysia, after initially introducing its version of soft power called
“Orangutan Diplomacy”
following China’s successful
“panda diplomacy,”
has now reversed its decision.
What is Orangutan Diplomacy?
It is a Malaysian strategy that seeks to use orangutan conservation as a tool of soft power, inspired by China’s “panda diplomacy.”
It had first announced plans to gift orangutans (IUCN Status:
Critically Endangered
) to palm oil-buying countries.
It engages other countries in conservation efforts, focusing on symbolic adoptions rather than sending animals abroad.
Reasons behind:
Palm Oil Industry Criticism
: Malaysia faces criticism for deforestation due to palm oil plantations, threatening orangutans.
Enhance Image
: It aims to counter negative perceptions and showcase commitment to sustainability and position Malaysia as a leader in wildlife protection.
Global Cooperation
: It seeks to strengthen ties with major palm oil importers like China, India, and the EU through conservation partnerships.
Criticisms:
Habitat Concerns
: Critics argue real conservation requires protecting habitats, not just symbolic actions.
Comparisons to Panda Diplomacy
: Malaysia’s effort lacks the infrastructure and commitment seen in China’s panda conservation.
PYQ:
[2021]
With reference to ‘palm oil’, consider the following statements :​
1. The palm oil tree is native to Southeast Asia.​
2. The palm oil is a raw material for some industries producing lipstick and perfumes.​
3. The palm oil can be used to produce biodiesel.​
Which of the statements given above are correct?​
(a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
**********