Vertical Fiscal Imbalance
Why in news?
The financial relationship between the Union government and the States in India is asymmetrical, reflecting a common feature in federal systems. The States are responsible for
61% of the revenue expenditure but collect only 38% of the revenue receipts
, as highlighted by the 15th Finance Commission.
This imbalance means that States rely heavily on transfers from the Union government to meet their expenditures. The result is a
Vertical Fiscal Imbalance (VFI)
in India's fiscal federalism, where the
decentralisation of expenditure responsibilities exceeds the States' revenue-raising capacity
What’s in today’s article?
Central Transfers to States
Vertical Fiscal Imbalance (VFI) in India
About
The Finance Commissions recommend the
States’ share in the net tax revenue of the Union government
Under Article 280, the President is required to constitute a Finance Commission (FC) at an interval of five years or earlier.
Article 280(3)(a
says that the FC has the responsibility to
make recommendations regarding the division of the net proceeds of taxes
between the Union and the states.
The difference between the gross and the net tax revenue includes collection costs, tax revenue to be assigned to Union territories, and cess and surcharges.
Composition of transfers
central taxes devolved to states are untied funds
, and states can spend them according to their discretion.
Over the years, tax devolved to states has constituted over 80% of the total central transfers to states.
The centre also provides grants to states and local bodies which must be used for specified purposes.
These grants have ranged between 12% to 19% of the total transfers.
Tax devolution to states
The 14th FC considerably increased the devolution of taxes from the centre to states from 32% to 42%.
In the 15
FC, share of states in the central taxes for the 2021-26 period is recommended to be 41%.
The adjustment of 1% is to provide for the newly formed union territories of J&K, and Ladakh from the resources of the centre.
The Commission had recommended that tax devolution should be the primary source of transfer of funds to states.
This would increase the flow of unconditional transfers and give states more flexibility in their spending.
Formula used to distribute fund among states
Population/Demography -
Population is an indicator of the expenditure needs of a state.
Demographic performance
- Demographic performance criterion rewards states for their efforts to control population growth.
The commission considered indicators like fertility rate, infant mortality rate, and sex ratio to assess states' efforts.
Income distance
– It is the difference between the per capita income of a state with the average per capita income of all states.
States with lower per capita income may be given a higher share to maintain equity among states
Area
is used as a criterion as a state with larger area has to incur additional administrative costs to deliver services.
Forest & Ecology
- it indicates that states with large forest covers bear the cost of not having area available for other economic activities.
Therefore, the rationale is that these states may be given a higher share.
Tax and fiscal efforts
Grant in aid
Besides the taxes devolved to states, another source of transfers from the centre to states is grants-in-aid.
As per the recommendations of the 15th Finance Commission, the following grants will be provided to states from the centre’s resource:
Revenue deficit grants
Sector-specific grants
: Sector-specific grants is given to states for eight sectors: health; school education; higher education, etc.
A portion of these grants will be performance-linked.
State-specific grants
: These will be given in the areas of: social needs; administrative governance and infrastructure; water and sanitation etc.
Grants to local bodies
Disaster risk management
Constitutional Division of Financial Duties
In India, the Union and State governments have distinct responsibilities for revenue collection and expenditure.
The Union government collects taxes like Personal Income Tax, Corporation Tax, and certain indirect taxes to maximise tax collection efficiency.
However, on the expenditure side, local governments are best positioned to efficiently deliver public goods and services to citizens.
Rising VFI in India
India's Vertical Fiscal Imbalance (VFI) is larger and increasing compared to other federal systems
, as noted by the 15th Finance Commission.
Crises like the COVID-19 pandemic
have further deepened the gap between the revenue generated and expenditure responsibilities of State governments.
The Role of the Finance Commission
Finance Commission is responsible for addressing VFI by determining how to distribute taxes collected by the Union government to the States
This is based on the "Net Proceeds," which include the Union’s Gross Tax Revenue minus surcharges, cesses, and collection costs.
The primary challenge of VFI relates to the allocation of these proceeds to the States.
In addition to tax devolution, the Finance Commission recommends grants under
Article 275
of the Constitution for States needing financial assistance.
However, these grants are often temporary and for specific purposes.
Additionally, the Union government makes tied transfers through centrally sponsored and central sector schemes, which come with conditionalities
, under Article 282
Unconditional Transfers: A Key Solution
Among the various transfers, only the devolution of taxes from net proceeds is untied and unconditional.
This makes it crucial for addressing the fiscal needs of the States without additional burdens or restrictions.
Raising Tax Devolution to Address VFI
Many States have demanded that the 16th Finance Commission raise the share of tax devolution from the net proceeds to 50%.
This demand is supported by the exclusion of significant amounts of cesses and surcharges from the net proceeds, reducing the total funds available for devolution.
Various analysts support this demand, showing that States' actual expenditures align with their borrowing limits.
To eliminate VFI, the share of net proceeds devolved to the States should rise to around 49%.
This would provide States with more untied resources, allowing them to respond better to local needs, enhance spending efficiency, and foster cooperative fiscal federalism.
Vertical Fiscal Imbalance.pdf
( Size:  1.4 MB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********PM Narendra Modi’s visit to Singapore
Why in news?
Prime Minister Modi visited Singapore during the second leg of a two-nation trip to South-East Asia, having travelled to Brunei Darussalam in the first leg.
What’s in today’s article?
India – Singapore relation
Key highlights of the visit
India - Singapore Relations
Background
Sir Stamford Raffles, in 1819, established a trading station in Singapore on the route of the Straits of Malacca which later became a crown colony and was governed from Kolkata till 1867.
The colonial connection is reflected in institutions and practices, usage of English and presence of a large Indian community.
India was one of the first countries to recognize Singapore in 1965.
India-Singapore relations were elevated to Strategic Partnership during the visit of PM Modi to Singapore in 2015
India-Singapore Ministerial Roundtable (ISMR)
The inaugural meeting of the ISMR took place in September 2022 in New Delhi.
The 2nd round of ISMR was held in Singapore in August 2024.
The Ministers reviewed the progress of India – Singapore Strategic Partnership, particularly under the pillars of Digitalization, Skills Development, Sustainability, Healthcare & Medicine, identified during the 1st meeting of ISMR.
It was decided to add two new pillars, Advanced Manufacturing and Connectivity for further strengthening bilateral cooperation.
Trade and economic cooperation
Singapore is India’s largest trade partner in ASEAN.
It is the leading source of FDI, among the largest sources of External Commercial Borrowings and Foreign Portfolio Investment.
Bilateral trade expanded after the conclusion of CECA from USD 6.7 billion in FY 2004-05 to
USD 35.6 billion in 2023-24
Singapore is India’s 6th largest trade partner (2023-24) with a share of 3.2 % of India’s overall trade.
India’s imports from Singapore in FY 23-24 were US$ 21.2 billion, and exports to Singapore totaled US$ 14.4 billion.
Investments
In FY 2023-24 Singapore was the largest source of FDI into India.
FDI equity inflows in India from Singapore during 2023-24 stood at US$ 11.774 billion.
The cumulative FDI inflows from Singapore to India stood at USD 159.9 billion (April 2000– March 2024) which is 24 percent of total FDI inflows in India.
The outward Indian FDI to Singapore stands at USD 4.8 billion (FY 2023-24).
Fintech cooperation
Commercial and technical arrangements have also been worked out for the acceptance of RuPay card in Singapore.
UPI-Paynow Linkage is another landmark development in the area of cross-border Fintech.
Singapore is the first nation with which India has begun this cross-border Person-to-Person (P2P) payment facility.
S&T Cooperation
In the past ten years, 17 satellites of Singapore have been launched from Indian soil.
Singapore co-hosted inaugural ASEAN – India Women Scientists Conclave in April 2024.
India and Singapore held an e-workshop in the area of digital health and medical technologies in July 2024.
Multilateral cooperation
Singapore has joined International Solar Alliance (In June 2023) and Global Bio-fuel Alliance (September 2023).
Singapore was ASEAN Country Coordinator for India for period 2021-24, during which India-ASEAN relations were upgraded to Comprehensive Strategic Partnership.
India and Singapore are part of multilateral groups like IORA, NAM and Commonwealth.
Indian Community
Ethnic Indians constitute about 9.1 % or around 3.5 lakhs of the resident population of 3.9 million in Singapore.
Tamil is one of the four official languages of Singapore. Hindi, Gujarati, Urdu, Bengali and Punjabi are also offered in schools.
Bilateral ties elevated to a comprehensive strategic partnership
During this visit, India and Singapore elevated their bilateral ties to a “comprehensive strategic partnership”.
Four Memorandums of Understanding (MoU) signed
:
Cooperation in the Field of Digital Technologies;
India-Singapore Semiconductor Ecosystem Partnership;
Cooperation in the Field of Health and Medicine;
Educational Cooperation and Skills Development.
Boost to trade and investment flows between the two countries
Leaders of both the sides called for further expanding trade and investment flows between the two countries.
PM Modi highlighted that
Singapore with an investment of around USD 160 billion in the Indian economy, is a leading economic partner for India
Discussed the outcome of the 2nd India-Singapore Ministerial Roundtable
The two leaders discussed the outcome of the 2nd India-Singapore Ministerial Roundtable held in Singapore in August 2024.
the Ministerial Roundtable is a unique mechanism where senior ministers from both sides deliberates and identifies new agendas for bilateral cooperation.
The roundtable had identified the six pillars of cooperation— advanced manufacturing, connectivity, digitalisation, healthcare & medicine, skills development and sustainability.
Boost to cultural connectivity
The leaders also discussed the celebration of the 60th anniversary of bilateral relations in 2025.
PM Modi announced that
India’s first Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre would be opened in Singapore
PM Narendra Modi’s visit to Singapore.pdf
( Size:  2.4 MB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Law Commission’s Role, Members & Recommendations
Why in the News?
The Union government has notified the constitution of the
23rd Law Commission of India
with effect from
September 1
.
The chairperson and members of the Law Commission are yet to be named. The decision will be taken by the Appointments Committee of Cabinet chaired by the Prime Minister.
What’s in Today’s Article?
About Law Commission (History, Role/Functions, How it is created, Composition, Reports)
About Law Commission of India:
It is a
non-statutory body
constituted by the Union government.
It is a commission established to ensure that the laws formed are just and fair which work towards its proper implementation.
It can be referred to as an
ad hoc body
, which is constituted for the fulfilment of a particular purpose.
Basically, it works as an advisory body to the Ministry of Law and Justice.
However, it is not defined under the Indian Constitution. It is constituted as part of
Article 39A
History of Law Commission in India:
The first pre-independence law commission was established in
1834
by the British Government in India.
It was established by the
Charter Act of 1833
and was chaired by
Lord Macaulay
The first Law Commission of independent India was established in the year 1955 which was headed by
M.C. Setalvad
Since the independence of India, there have been 22 Law Commissions. The current Law Commission (22
) is chaired by
Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
How is the Law Commission Created?
A law commission is
created when the Union government passes a resolution for the formation a new commission after the expiry of the last one
After the resolution is passed , and the President gives assent to it, the government has the liberty to choose the chairperson for the new commission.
Composition of Law Commission:
The Commission is headed by a
Chairperson
, usually a
retired Supreme Court judge
, and comprises legal experts, academicians, and senior advocates.
The members are appointed for a
term of three years
, during which they focus on different areas of legal reforms.
Functions & Role:
The main function of the Law Commission is to recommend reforms based on detailed research and public consultation. Key tasks include:
Reviewing existing laws
: To identify obsolete or irrelevant laws that need to be repealed or amended.
Proposing new laws
: Based on emerging legal challenges or gaps in the system.
Simplifying legal processes
: To make laws more accessible and understandable to the general public.
Studying judicial reforms
: Recommending changes in the judiciary to enhance efficiency, reduce delays, and improve justice delivery.
Important Recommendations of the Commission:
The Law Commission has taken up various subjects on references made by Department of Legal Affairs, Supreme Court and High Courts and
submitted 277 reports
The Commission provides thought provoking and vital review of the laws in India.
Important Recommendations include:
170
of the Law commission on Electoral reforms, 1999 had suggested
simultaneous Lok Sabha and State Assembly Elections
. It recommended that this is for the improvement of governance and stability of the states.
The Law Commission in its
262
recommended the
abolition of death penalty
for all crimes except terror-related offences and waging war against the state.
In recent years, the Commission has worked on sensitive issues such as
hate speech
uniform
civil
code
data protection laws
Its reports have been a source of significant debate and have helped in shaping new legislation.
What is the Law Commission_ its role, members, & recommendations _.pdf
( Size:  1.1 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********What is Loss and Damage Fund (LDF)?
Why in News?
Following the devastating landslides that recently hit Kerala's Wayanad district, an important discussion has arisen on the possibility of subnational entities seeking compensation via the UNFCCC's Loss and Damage Fund (LDF).
Although this demand is reasonable, it is not as simple as it seems to obtain climate funding.
What’s in Today’s Article?
What is the Loss and Damage Fund (LDF)?
How can India Take Advantage from the LDF?
Need for the More Decentralised Funding from the LDF
Challenges and Way Ahead Towards Utilising LDF
Establishment:
It was established at the 2022 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Conference
(COP27) in Egypt
What is Loss and Damage?
It refers to the adverse consequences brought about by climate change
, and resulting in a range of impacts, such as
Loss of human lives,
Damage to infrastructure,
Loss of property and crops,
As well as the deterioration of ecosystems.
These impacts extend beyond the purely economic realm to
encompass a broader spectrum of both economic and non-economic losses.
Objective of the LDF:
It provides financial support
to regions suffering both economic and non-economic losses caused by climate change.
These include extreme weather events and slow-onset processes, such as rising sea levels.
Financial support will be provided
in the form of
grants, concessional financing
that can be utilised by any eligible country.
Administration of the LDF:
The World Bank (WB)
will assume the role of overseeing the fund's overall coordination, ensuring the efficient allocation of resources and aiding nations in their endeavours to recover from the aftermath of natural disasters.
A Governing Board
determines how the Fund’s resources are disbursed, with the WB serving as the interim trustee.
The Board is currently developing mechanisms
to facilitate access to the Fund’s resources, including direct access, small grants and rapid disbursement options.
Significance of the LDF:
The establishment of the Fund marks the initial phase in the implementation of financial instruments aimed at addressing consequences and fostering recovery from climate-induced disasters.
Concerns related to LDF:
Despite its stated goals, concerns persist that climate funds are
often too slow to be accessible immediately after a disaster
, particularly for local communities at the sub-national level.
It is expected that the LDF would face similar issues.
In damages caused by weather-related disasters,
India has lost more than $56 billion
between 2019 and 2023.
In spite of this, India's National Climate Action Policy and budgets
give mitigation efforts precedence over adaptation.
This led to a
subdued participation of India
in Loss and Damage dialogues at COP meetings.
Given that some parts of India are extremely vulnerable to climate change, India should push for
more decentralised ways of allocating funds from the LDF
, in international climate change negotiations
Need for the More Decentralised Funding from the LDF:
Adaptation and loss and damage needs are more strongly felt at the ground level by State governments.
For example,
in Kerala, the majority of the financial burden for disaster recovery fell on the State government.
A notable example is the
Rebuild Kerala Development Programme
, launched in the aftermath of the (August) 2018 floods in the state.
The fact that the WB provided loans to fund this program shows how important international climate finance is to the post-disaster recovery process.
Challenges and Way Ahead Towards Utilising LDF:
Absence of a systematic method for conducting thorough evaluations of losses resulting from disasters:
This means that significant loss and damage needs that could qualify for assistance from the LDF
may go unassessed
and could impede India’s ability to access the LDF
in the future
Way ahead:
A clear legal and policy framework is desperately needed in India that prioritises locally led adaptation and provides a more precise method for assessing loss and damage.
Can Kerala access funds from the Loss and Damage Fund_.pdf
( Size:  359.3 KB  )
Click to View More
Environment & Ecology
**********