Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project (KLIP)
The National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA) is likely to submit its final report on the Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Scheme (KLIS) soon, excluding the aspect of conducting geo-technical tests.
About Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project (KLIP):
It is a
multi-purpose irrigation project
Godavari River
in Kaleshwaram, Bhupalpally,
Telangana
, India.
It is designed to provide
water for irrigation and drinking purposes
to about 45 lakh acres in 20 of the 31 districts in Telangana, apart from Hyderabad and Secunderabad.
Currently the
world’s largest multi-stage lift irrigation project
, its farthest upstream influence is at the
confluence of the Pranhita and Godavari rivers.
The Pranahita River is itself a confluence of various smaller tributaries, including the Wardha, Painganga, and Wainganga rivers, which combine to form the seventh-largest drainage basin on the subcontinent.
KLIP is divided into 7 links and 28 packages spanning a distance of approximately 500 km (310 mi) through 13 districts and utilizing a
canal network of more than 1,800 km
(1,100 mi).
The project aims to
produce a total of 240 TMC
(195 from Medigadda Barrage, 20 from the Sripada Yellampalli project, and 25 from groundwater), of which
169
has been allocated
for irrigation, 30 for Hyderabad municipal water, 16 for miscellaneous industrial uses,
and 10 for drinking water in nearby villages, with the remainder being estimated evaporation loss.
Click to View More
Source :
NDSA likely to submit final report on Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Scheme by December end
Geography
**********Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS)
After a delay of more than a year, a permanent Vice-Chancellor is set to be appointed in Mumbai-based Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), with the selection committee slated to conduct in-person interviews with 10 shortlisted candidates
About Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS):
It is a
multi-campus, public-funded research
university in Mumbai, India.
TISS is Asia's
oldest institute for professional social work education.
It was founded in 1936 in the then-Bombay Presidency of British India as the Sir Dorabji Tata Graduate School of Social Work by the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust.
In 1944, it was renamed the Tata Institute of Social Sciences.
In 1964,
TISS was
declared Deemed to be a University
under
Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act (
UGC
), 1956.
TISS's
academic programs focus on the Social Sciences
and offer doctoral degrees in Management and Labour Studies, Disaster Studies, Development Studies, Education, Gender Studies, Health Studies, Law, Media and Cultural Studies, Public Policy, Rural Development and Social Work.
Since its inception, TISS has
had a focus on field activities,
including responding to disasters such as the Partition of India, the Bhopal disaster and Uttarakhand floods.
Click to View More
Source :
Selection Committee to interview 10 shortlisted candidates for TISS Vice-Chancellor post
Polity & Governance
**********Sultanpur National Park
The Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) of Forest and Wildlife recently asked the district administration to submit a report on illegal construction around the Sultanpur National Park and their status to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change of India (MoEF & CC).
About Sultanpur National Park:
It is located in the
Gurgaon district of Haryana,
46 km from Delhi.
Formerly known as Sultanpur Bird Sanctuary, it spans 1.42
sq.km
., consisting primarily of
marshy lakes and floodplains.
It includes a core area of 1.21 sq. km containing the main
Sultanpur Lake/Jheel.
The Sultanpur Jheel is a
seasonal freshwater wetland
with fluctuating water levels throughout the year.
This shallow lake is mostly fed by waters from
River Yamuna’s Gurgaon canal
and the overflowing waters of the neighboring agricultural lands.
It was recognised as a
Ramsar site
, a wetland of international importance, in 2021. It has been identified as an
Important Bird Area
by Bird Life International.
Flora
: The vegetation is characterized by
tropical and dry deciduous types
such as grasses, dhok, khair, tendu, jamun, neem, berberis, and species of Acacia.
Fauna
Over 320 bird species have been recorded at Sultanpur, making it a vital wintering ground.
It forms a
part of the
‘Central Asian Migratory Flyway’
and thousands of
migratory birds from
the countries of
Russia, Turkey, Afghanistan and Europe
visit the park during the winter months.
Some iconic species found here are the Common Hoopoe, Purple Sunbird, Black Francolin, Little Cormorant, Indian Cormorant, Siberian Crane, and Greater Flamingo.
Other migratory birds that flock seasonally include the Common Teal, Common Greenshank and Ruff.
In addition to the avian species, some other faunal species, such as
Nilgai, Sambar, Golden jackals,
wild dogs, striped hyenas, Indian porcupine, mongoose, etc., are also found here.
Click to View More
Source :
Submit report on illegal construction near Sultanpur National Park, secy asks Gurgaon admin
Environment & Ecology
**********Key Facts about Durgadi Fort
After 48 years, the Kalyan civil court recently dismissed a suit filed by a Muslim trust claiming ownership of an idgah (prayer space) inside the historical Durgadi Fort in Kalyan and ruled in favour of the state government.
About Durgadi Fort:
It is a fort located in
, near Mumbai in
Maharashtra
Perched on the
banks of the Ulhas River
, the fort provides panoramic views of the surrounding landscape and the city of Kalyan.
is the busiest junction as well as a
key location from ancient times
This was an
important international harbour
developed during the Satavahana
built by Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj
and marks the
initiation of the Maratha Navy.
captured Kalyan and Bhiwandi from Adil Shah
on 24th October 1654.
He built a fort near the creek as a support to Kalyan and used it as a dock to manufacture ships.
The fort is named after Goddess Durga, and a temple dedicated to the goddess is located within the premises.
The fort holds significant historical value, as it
important military stronghold
during various periods in Indian history.
Click to View More
Source :
Maharashtra court junks Muslim trust’s claim on Durgadi Fort space
History & Culture
**********Malwa Canal Project
Nearly 1.30 lakh trees and plants are likely to be felled for the construction of the proposed 150-km-long Malwa Canal, a flagship project of Punjab Chief Minister said recently.
About Malwa Canal Project:
It is a
planned irrigation
and water management project in
Punjab, India
It is the first of its kind to be constructed in Punjab since independence.
Estimated to cost Rs 2,300 crore, the canal will originate from the
Harike headworks on the Sutlej in Ferozepur district.
It will tail off at Warring Khera village in Muktsar district, close to the border with Haryana, and will
flow parallel to
Sirhind Feeder and Rajasthan Feeder canals
, to the latter’s east.
The canal will be 150 km long, 50 feet wide, and 12.6 feet deep.
It will carry 2,000 cusecs of water (A cusec is flow equivalent to 1 cubic foot per second.)
It is designed to cater to
the irrigation needs of nearly 2 lakh acres in southern Punjab, running parallel to the left bank of the Rajasthan Feeder Canal.
Click to View More
Source :
1.30 lakh trees face axe for Malwa Canal Project
Geography
**********DAE- Homi Bhabha Chair Scheme
The Union Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Science & Technology informed the Rajya Sabha about the DAE- Homi Bhabha Chair Scheme.
About
DAE- Homi Bhabha Chair Scheme:
It is administered by the
Department of Atomic Energy.
It is for
Distinguished Scientists/Professors,
in order to give recognition and an opportunity to outstanding Scientists and Engineers including those retired /superannuated scientists/engineers who were involved in the development of sensitive and/ or critical technologies to carry out research and development work in the fields of their choice and of interest to the Department of Atomic Energy.
The tenure under DAE- Homi Bhabha Chair Scheme is for the
period of one to five years
at the discretion of the Selection Committee.
Under the scheme each awardee shall be entitled to
an honorarium of Rs. 200000/-
m. (In case honorarium plus pension sanctioned is more than pay last drawn, honorarium would be restricted to pay last drawn before retirement).
A contingency grant of Rs.76000/- per annum to cover expenditures like secretarial assistance, telephone bills and stationery.
A lump sum equipment allowance (inclusive of Book Allowance) not exceeding Rs.125000/- would also be made available during the entire tenure of the awardee subject to actual utilization. The equipment allowance also includes a sum of Rs.10000/- towards Book Allowance.
A fixed monthly transport allowance is also provided in case the awardee of the scheme is not provided with an official vehicle.
Click to View More
Source :
PARLIAMENT QUESTION: HOMI BHABHA CHAIR SCHEME
**********CE20 Cryogenic engine
Recently, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) has successfully carried out the sea level hot test of its CE20 cryogenic engine.
About
CE20 Cryogenic engine:
It is the indigenous engine developed by the
Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre of ISRO.
powering the upper stage of the LVM3 launch vehicle
and has been qualified to operate at a thrust level of 19 tonnes.
This engine has successfully powered the upper stage of six LVM3 missions so far.
Recently, the engine was qualified for the
Gaganyaan mission
with a
thrust level of 20 tonnes
and also to an uprated thrust level of 22 tonnes for the future C32 stage, towards enhancing the payload capability of the LVM3 launch vehicle.
It features an
innovative Nozzle Protection
that overcomes previous complexities in engine testing.
Key achievements of the test include
the successful testing of an engine with a nozzle area ratio of 100, the evaluation of a multi-element igniter by activating only the first element, and the confirmation of normal engine and facility performance.
Significance:
This test marks a significant step in ISRO’s indigenous engine development, showcasing its ability to overcome complex rocket propulsion challenges.
Click to View More
Source :
ISRO conducts successful sea level hot test of CE20 cryogenic engine, paving the way for future missions
Science & Tech
**********SAMARTH Udyog Bharat 4.0 Initiative
Recently, the Minister of State for Heavy Industries and Steel provided information about the SAMARTH Udyog Bharat 4.0 initiative in the Rajya Sabha.
About
SAMARTH Udyog Bharat 4.0 Initiative:
It is an initiative of the
Ministry of Heavy Industry & Public Enterprises,
Government of India under its scheme on
Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector.
SAMARTH Udyog encompasses manufacturers, vendors and customers as the main stakeholders.
The experiential and demonstration centres for Industry 4.0 have been proposed to spread awareness about I4.0 amongst the Indian manufacturing industries.
Under this 4 Smart Advanced Manufacturing and Rapid Transformation Hub (SAMARTH) Centres have been set up namely:
Centre for Industry 4.0 (C4i4) Lab, Pune;
IITD-AIA Foundation for Smart Manufacturing, IIT Delhi;
I-4.0 India @ IISc, Bengaluru; and
Smart Manufacturing Demo & Development Cell, CMTI, Bengaluru.
SAMARTH Centres
have been providing assistance
to industries including MSMEs to train the workforce and make them aware of Industry 4.0 technologies in the following ways:
Organizing Awareness Seminars/ Workshops
and knowledge-sharing events on Industry 4.0;
Training industries
to create awareness about Industry 4.0;
Providing consultancy (in areas such as IOT Hardware, Software development, and data analytics) and incubation support to start-ups including MSMEs.
No financial assistance is given to any industry including MSME for adopting Industry 4.0-enabled technologies under the SAMARTH centre initiative of the Scheme.
Click to View More
Source :
SAMARTH UDYOG BHARAT 4.0 INITIATIVE
Economy
**********Konda Reddi Tribe
Konda Reddi tribe continues to live in harmony with nature and their story offers a poignant reminder of the fragile balance between tradition and modernity.
About
Konda Reddi Tribe:
Konda Reddis is a
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group (PVTG)
inhabiting the banks of the river Godavari in
Andhra Pradesh.
Language:
They speak Telugu with a unique accent.
Religion:
The primary religion practiced by the Konda Reddi is
Folk Hinduism
, characterized by local traditions and
cults of local deities
worshipped at the community level.
Family and Marriage:
The family is
patriarchal and patrilocal
. Monogamy is a rule, but polygamous families are also found.
Marriage by negotiations, by love and elopement, by service, by capture, and by exchange are socially accepted ways of acquiring mates.
Political Organization:
They have their own institution of social control
called ‘Kula Panchayat’.
Each village has a traditional headman called ‘
Pedda Kapu’.
The office of the headman is hereditary, and the headman is also the Pujari (priest) of the village deities.
Livelihood:
They are primarily
shifting cultivators
and largely depend on the flora and fauna of forests for their livelihood. They cultivate largely jowar, which is their staple food.
The Konda Reddi tribe’s way of
life largely revolves around the cow,
which is a source of sustenance for them.
The traditional houses of the Konda Reddis have retained their unique architectural look over the centuries.
These tribal people are aggressive in the
cultivation of commercial crops such
as cashew, niger, chilli and cotton under the Podu cultivation method.
The tribe has adopted a unique circular-shaped architecture for housing. The houses, built with
circular mud walls and thatched roofs, resemble
Bhunga architecture of Gujarat’s Kachchh region.
Click to View More
Source :
Jaladam Valley, home to the Konda Reddi tribe, offers a glimpse into a centuries-old way of life
Geography
**********Dulcibella camanchaca
Researchers from the University of Concepción in Chile and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in the US have discovered Dulcibella camanchaca in the Atacama Trench.
About
Dulcibella camanchaca:
It is a new predatory
amphipod species.
It was found at a depth of 7,902 meters in the
It has been
classified within the Eusiridae family
and represents a newly identified genus, marking a significant addition to the catalogue of deep-sea biodiversity.
Features
It measures just under 4 centimetres and is larger than its closest relatives and exhibits unique features, such as
raptorial appendages called gnathopods
, used for hunting smaller organisms.
Unlike scavenging amphipods commonly found in trenches, this species actively
prey on other amphipods,
playing a crucial role in the deep-sea food web.
fast-swimming predator
that we named after 'darkness' in the languages of the peoples from the Andes region.
It has pale colouring, a common trait in deep-sea species, that enhances its ability to thrive in its pitch-black environment.
Key points about the Atacama Trench
The Atacama Trench stretches along the eastern
South Pacific Ocean
, plunging to depths exceeding 8,000 m
off the coast of northern Chile.
It is part of the
hadal zone a region
characterised by intense pressure, near-freezing temperatures, and completes darkness.
It is one of the most geographically isolated hadal features and is situated below eutrophic surface waters and characterized by high sediment loads.
Click to View More
Source :
Scientists find alien-like predator in the depths of the ocean, call it 'Darkness'
Environment & Ecology
**********India’s NPA Crisis
Why in News?
India's banking system has been grappling with an alarming surge in non-performing assets (NPAs). RTI enquiry, by a leading newspaper, revealed that a staggering 43% of total NPAs as of March 2019 - amounting to ₹4.02 lakh crore - was owed by just 100 companies.
This highlights systemic issues and the concentration of bad loans among a few prominent borrowers.
What’s in Today’s Article?
What are Non-Performing Assets (NPAs)?
Key Highlights of the NPA Crisis in India
Impact on the Banking Sector
Conclusion
Definition:
A NPA is a loan or advance for which the principal or interest payment remained overdue
for a period of 90 days.
For banks,
a loan is an asset
because the interest paid on these loans is one of the most significant sources of income for the bank.
When customers, retail or corporates, are not able to pay the interest, the asset becomes ‘non-performing’ for the bank because it is
not earning anything for the bank.
Therefore, the RBI has defined NPAs as assets
that stop generating income for banks.
Banks are required to make their NPAs numbers public and to the RBI as well from time to time.
Classification of assets:
As per the RBI guideline, banks are required to classify NPAs further into -
Substandard assets:
Assets which have remained NPA for a period less than or equal to 12 months.
Doubtful assets:
An asset that has remained in the substandard category for a period of 12 months.
Loss assets:
It is considered uncollectible and of such little value that its continuance as a bankable asset is not warranted, although there may be some recovery value.
NPA Provisioning:
Provision for a loan refers to a certain percentage of loan amount set aside by the banks.
The standard rate of provisioning for loans in Indian banks varies from
5-20%
depending on the business sector and the repayment capacity of the borrower.
In the cases of NPA
, 100% provisioning is required in accordance with the Basel-III norms.
GNPA and NNPA:
There are primarily two metrics that help us to understand the NPA situation of any bank.
GNPA:
It is an absolute amount that talks about the total value of gross NPAs for the bank in a particular quarter or financial year as the case may be.
Net NPAs subtracts the provisions made by the bank from the gross NPA. Therefore, net NPA gives the exact value of NPAs after the bank has made specific provisions for it.
NPA Ratios:
NPAs can also be expressed as
a percentage of total advances
. It gives us an idea of
how much of the total advances is not recoverable
For example
GNPA ratio is the ratio of the total GNPA of the total advances.
NNPA ratio uses net NPA to find out the ratio to the total advances.
Key Highlights of the NPA Crisis in India:
Timeline of NPAs:
Peak in 2018:
NPAs reached a historic high of ₹10.36 lakh crore.
Decline:
NPAs reduced to ₹5.71 lakh crore by March 2023, aided by write-offs by banks.
RTI revelation:
The list of top defaulters was accessed under the Right to Information Act after a four-year legal battle, highlighting
reluctance from RBI to disclose such information.
Extent of NPAs:
Gross NPAs:
Scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) recorded gross NPAs of ₹9.33 lakh crore as of March 31, 2019, the 2nd-highest in Indian banking history.
Top defaulters:
The top 100 defaulters alone accounted for ₹8.44 lakh crore in total debt, of which nearly 50% was declared as NPAs.
Sectoral analysis:
Three sectors -
manufacturing, energy, and construction
- dominated, contributing over 50% (₹4.58 lakh crore) of the total debt of the top 100 defaulters.
Sector-wise breakdown of defaulters:
Energy sector: 34 companies
Manufacturing sector: 32 companies
Construction and real estate: 20 companies
Telecom: 5 companies
Other sectors: 9 companies
Quantum of debt (Top defaulters):
Bhushan Power & Steel Limited: ₹41,400 crore.
Essar Steel India Limited: ₹69,360 crore (later acquired by ArcelorMittal Nippon Steel India Limited in 2019).
Other major defaulters: Reliance Communications (₹46,659 crore), Videocon Industries (₹58,052 crore), and Jaiprakash Associates (₹36,591 crore).
Impact on the Banking Sector:
Ongoing debt concerns (2023):
Outstanding debt:
By March 2023, 51 of these 100 companies still carried debts of ₹3.58 lakh crore, indicating persistent financial stress.
These defaulters span crucial sectors:
Like oil & gas, thermal and hydro power, mining, shipbuilding, and infrastructure development.
Limited recoveries:
82 of the top 100 entities are under bankruptcy, with one-third undergoing liquidation, significantly reducing recovery prospects.
High-profile companies like Jet Airways, Gitanjali Gems, and IL&FS subsidiaries feature prominently in the defaulter list, indicating minimal returns for lenders.
Curb investment:
Banks lack enough funds to lend for other productive activities in the economy.
To maintain their profits, banks may need to raise interest rates.
Reduced investments could lead to higher unemployment rates.
Conclusion:
The concentration of bad loans among a few corporate giants raises c
oncerns about governance and accountability in India’s banking system
While recovery efforts are ongoing, the NPA crisis underscores the need for stronger regulatory oversight and improved lending practices to prevent similar episodes in the future.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  2.5 MB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********Impeachment of South Korea's President Yoon Suk Yeol
Why in the News?
South Korean President Yoon Suk Yeol vowed to fight for his political future after he was impeached in a second vote by the opposition-led parliament over his short-lived attempt to impose martial law, a move that had shocked the nation.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background (Context, Why Martial Law was Declared, Aftermath)
Impeachment (Steps, Significance, India’s Stance, etc.)
Background of the Incident:
faced growing political unrest and public dissatisfaction during his tenure, primarily driven by his controversial governance style and strained relations with opposition parties.
Protests erupted across the nation over various issues, including economic downturns, alleged misuse of power, and suppression of civil liberties.
The immediate trigger for the crisis was Yoon's declaration of
, which followed escalating mass protests and rising tensions with North Korea.
Critics accused him of using martial law as a pretext to suppress dissent and consolidate power.
Why Martial Law Was Declared?
The President declared martial law under the pretext of addressing national security concerns, citing escalating unrest and protests against his administration, combined with a politically hostile environment.
Yoon's declaration, made abruptly on
December 3, 2024
, came amid growing opposition to his presidency, low approval ratings due to corruption allegations, and his inability to advance policies in a parliament dominated by rivals.
Martial law enabled him to deploy the military, suspend civil rights, and limit the powers of parliament and other institutions, ostensibly to restore order.
This decision was seen as an attempt to suppress dissent, consolidate power, and bypass parliamentary challenges, which had hampered his administration since 2022.
Aftermath:
The move backfired significantly. Public outrage erupted, with massive protests and strikes led by labor unions and citizens calling for Yoon’s resignation.
National Assembly swiftly convened to repeal the martial law within six hours, unanimously overturning it
, including votes from members of Yoon’s own party.
Legal and political analysts, as well as opposition lawmakers, labelled the declaration unconstitutional and tantamount to a coup.
Investigations into the decree have led to the arrest of several high-ranking officials, intensifying calls for Yoon's impeachment.
Impeachment Process:
South Korea's National Assembly initiated the impeachment process against Yoon Suk Yeol after securing a majority vote to proceed with the motion.
The impeachment was based on allegations of abuse of power, violation of constitutional rights, and failure to uphold democratic principles.
Key steps in the process included:
Filing of the Motion
: The impeachment motion was tabled by opposition lawmakers, citing Yoon’s unconstitutional actions during martial law.
National Assembly Vote
: A two-thirds majority in the National Assembly approved the motion.
Constitutional Court Review
: Following the parliamentary vote, the Constitutional Court began hearings to determine whether the impeachment met the constitutional threshold. After several weeks of deliberation, the court upheld the impeachment decision.
Yoon Suk Yeol became the third South Korean president to be impeached after Park Geun-hye in 2017
In 2004, President Roh Moo-hyun was impeached at parliament over an alleged election law violation but the court later overturned his impeachment and restored his presidential powers.
Roh jumped to his death in 2009, after he had left office, amid a corruption scandal involving his family.
Significance of the Impeachment:
Strengthening Democratic Norms
: The impeachment reinforced South Korea's commitment to democracy and the rule of law, showcasing the resilience of its constitutional framework.
Political Realignment
: The ruling party faced internal divisions and a decline in public support, leading to major political realignments and possible elections.
Public Accountability
: It sent a strong message that abuse of power and disregard for civil liberties would not be tolerated in a modern democracy.
India’s Stance:
India, as a strategic partner of South Korea, closely monitored the developments.
While maintaining a neutral position, India emphasized the importance of democratic governance and constitutional processes.
Diplomatic engagements between the two countries continued unaffected, reflecting India’s focus on long-term economic and security cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region.
Conclusion:
The impeachment of President Yoon Suk Yeol marked a pivotal moment in South Korea's political history, highlighting the nation’s adherence to democratic principles even amid significant challenges.
While the process showcased the strength of South Korea's institutional framework, it also underscored the need for leaders to uphold democratic values to maintain public trust and international credibility.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  323.8 KB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Syria after Assad’s exit
Why in news?
Bashar al-Assad, after 24 years as Syria’s President, has fled to Russia with his family following the collapse of his regime. A transitional government led by the Islamist militant group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), which previously controlled Idlib, has taken charge.
While many Syrians celebrate the end of Assad’s dictatorship, there is widespread anxiety about the future under HTS. Regionally, Turkey, a key supporter of HTS, seeks to expand its influence in West Asia, whereas Iran and Russia, Assad’s primary backers, face a significant setback. Meanwhile, Israel is exploiting the power vacuum in Syria to seize more territory.
What’s in today’s article?
Reasons Behind the Fall of the Assad Regime
Current Power Structure in Syria
Geopolitical Stakes in Post-Assad Syria
Uncertain Future for a Post-Assad Syria
The Assad regime, which endured 13 years of civil war, collapsed within 12 days due to a combination of military, economic, and geopolitical factors.
By 2017, with the support of Russia, Iran, and Hezbollah, the regime regained much of its lost territory but failed to eliminate militant opposition, particularly the Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), led by Abu Muhammed al-Jolani.
Jolani, a former al-Qaeda leader, established a rebel administration in Idlib and planned a major offensive against Assad’s forces.
crumbling economy
(worsened by an 87% GDP decline since 2011), Western sanctions, and the
demoralization of underpaid soldiers
further weakened Assad’s grip.
Repeated Israeli airstrikes
shifting priorities of external allies
like Russia, Iran, and Hezbollah diminished the regime’s military strength.
On November 27, 2024, HTS militants exploited this vulnerability, launching an offensive near Aleppo, triggering the rapid collapse of Assad’s regime.
Syria is now divided among four main militant coalitions, with the
emerging as the most powerful.
The HTS, claims to have severed ties with al-Qaeda and vows to respect Syria’s diversity, but its fighters are transnational jihadists.
HTS’s main ally is the Syrian National Army (SNA)
, a Turkish-backed militia formed from defected Syrian soldiers.
Together, they launched the November 27 offensive that contributed to Assad’s fall.
Other groups include the
Southern Fron
t, a coalition of militias in southern Syria, some supported by Jordan.
Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF)
, primarily composed of Kurdish fighters, maintain relative autonomy in the Kurdish region and were previously backed by the U.S.
Lastly,
Alawite militias
, linked to Assad’s sect, remain active in the coastal region, though the HTS has urged them to cut ties with the fallen regime.
Syria holds immense geopolitical significance, with major powers vying for influence.
Russia relies on its naval base in Tartus
, the only one outside former Soviet territory, and its air base to project force from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean and beyond.
This strategic need partly drove Russia's 2015 intervention to support the Assad regime.
With Assad's fall, Russia’s primary focus shifts to securing these bases.
For Iran
, Syria was a critical ally in West Asia and a key link to Hezbollah in Lebanon. The regime's collapse threatens Iran’s supply routes and regional deterrence.
Turkey, however, has emerged stronger
. Having long sought Assad’s removal, Turkey strategically shifted to supporting its proxies, including the HTS-SNA coalition now in Damascus.
President Erdogan's calculated moves have expanded Turkish influence across Syria, extending it to the borders of Iraq, Jordan, and Israel, marking a significant geopolitical victory over Russia and Iran.
While the fall of Assad’s regime has raised hopes for a new Syria, the country’s turbulent history and current realities cast doubt on a peaceful transition.
Militants like the HTS have promised inclusivity, rebuilding institutions, and welcoming refugees, but
their Salafi-jihadist ideology and autocratic tendencies
suggest otherwise.
Rebuilding Syria requires demobilizing militias, a challenge the HTS lacks both resources and ideological clarity to address.
Compounding the complexity are competing regional interests
:
southern militias demand a share of power,
the Kurdish SDF seeks autonomy, and
Turkey views the SDF as a terrorist threat, with Turkish-backed militias already attacking them.
Historical parallels, like post-Soviet Afghanistan, post-Gaddafi Libya, and post-Saddam Iraq, show how regime changes often lead to prolonged chaos.
Without effective governance and reconciliation, Syria risks following a similar path of instability and conflict.
Syria after Assad’s exit.pdf
( Size:  1.7 MB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Constitution debate - PM outlines 11 resolutions
Why in news?
PM Modi proposed 11 resolutions which include upholding existing reservations for marginalised sections but strongly opposing any religion-based quota.
He proposed these resolutions while replying to a two-day debate in Lok Sabha on the
'Glorious Journey of 75 Years of the Constitution of India'
What’s in today’s article?
Special Constitution Debate: Marking 75 Years of Adoption
11 Pledges for the Nation’s Future
Conclusion
A two-day special session in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha commemorates 75 years since the Indian Constitution’s adoption on November 26, 1949.
The debate reflects on the evolution of the Constitution and addresses ideological conflicts, including judicial-legislative balance, religion in public life, and fundamental rights.
Why convene a Constitution debate now?
The impetus for this special session stems from the 75th anniversary of the Constitution’s adoption by the Constituent Assembly.
The decision to hold the debate followed extensive discussions between Parliamentary Affairs Minister and floor leaders of various political parties.
This debate provides the government a chance to demonstrate its commitment to constitutional principles while engaging with ongoing discussions about India’s legal and governance systems.
Central to this is an ideological conflict over
varying interpretations of the Constitution, including the balance between the judiciary and legislature, the role of religion in public life, and the evolving application of fundamental rights
Citizen Duties
: Every individual and the government must adhere to their duties to uphold the nation's progress.
Inclusive Development
: Aimed at fostering regional and community-based growth aligned with the vision of Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas.
Zero Tolerance for Corruption
: Modi emphasized the need to reject social acceptance of corruption.
Pride in Laws and Traditions
: Citizens were urged to respect India’s laws, regulations, and heritage while shedding colonial mindsets.
Opposition to Religion-Based Quotas
: Modi reaffirmed commitment to existing reservations but called for resistance against introducing religion-based quotas.
Women-Led Development
: Envisioning India as a global leader in empowering women.
Regional Growth for National Development
: Advocated the mantra, “
Development of the nation through development of states.
”
Respect for the Constitution
: Stressed the importance of protecting the Constitution from misuse for political gains.
Dynastic Politics and Meritocracy
: Urged a shift from nepotism to merit-based governance.
Pride in Indian Heritage
: Promoted fostering pride in India’s cultural and historical legacy.
Unity in Diversity
: Reaffirmed the vision of Ek Bharat, Shrestha Bharat and collective national efforts.
While PM Modi’s 11 resolutions aimed to outline a roadmap for India’s future, they faced sharp criticism from the Opposition, who dismissed them as rhetoric lacking substance. The debate underscored deep political divides over governance, reservations, and corruption narratives.
Constitution debate - PM outlines 11 resolutions.pdf
( Size:  2.2 MB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********