Pandoh Dam
Amidst the ongoing heavy rain and snowfall in the higher reaches of Himachal Pradesh, the Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB) opened the spillway gates of the Pandoh Dam recently as a precautionary measure.
About Pandoh Dam:
It is an
embankment Dam
that lies in the
Mandi district of Himachal Pradesh.
Constructed
on Beas River, t
he primary purpose of Pandoh Dam is
hydroelectric power generation.
concrete gravity dam
, standing 76 meters (249 feet) tall.
It was commissioned in 1977 and is located at a distance of 10 km from Manali.
Being a
part of a run-of-the-river power design
, the Pandoh Dam
diverts water from Beas
to southwest through a channel of tunnels which are 38 km long.
Before it is discharged into the Sutlej River
, the water of the dam is used for power generation at the
Dehar Power House
(with a capacity of 990 MW).
The dam has also created the
Pandoh Lake,
a popular tourist spot located 19 km upstream from the town of Mandi on the river Beas.
The dam is under the
Bhakra Beas Management Board.
The road that goes over the dam is
NH 21.
Click to View More
Source :
Heavy rain continues in Himachal, BBMB opens spillway gates of Pandoh Dam
Geography
**********Green Sea Turtle
The carcass of a green sea turtle washed ashore on Marina beach in Chennai recently.
About Green Sea Turtle:
It is the
largest hard-shelled sea turtle.
Scientific Name:
Chelonia mydas
They are
unique
among sea turtles in that they are
herbivores
, eating mostly seagrasses and algae.
This
diet
is what
gives their fat a greenish color
(not their shells), which is where their name comes from.
Distribution:
Green turtles are found throughout the world,
mainly in tropical and subtropical waters.
These turtles are found nesting along the coastline of more than
80 countries,
with the
largest nesting populations
in Costa Rica and Australia.
Similar to other sea turtles, green sea turtles
migrate long distances
between their feeding grounds and their nesting sites, with recorded distances longer than 1,615 miles (2,600 kilometers).
Features:
large in size
, attaining about 120 cm in length and weighing about 136-159 kg.
They have a
comparatively small head.
The green turtle has a
smooth carapace
varies in shape,
between sub-circular and heart-shaped, and in colouration between
black, grey, green, brown, and yellow.
The plastron
(bottom shell) is yellowish-white
in colour.
The carapace is the turtle's upper shell, made of large, hard scales called scutes.
do not have teeth
, but their
jaws have modified “beaks
” suited to their particular diet.
They do
not have visible ears
but have eardrums covered by skin. They
hear best at low frequencies,
and their sense of smell is excellent.
Their
vision underwater is good,
but they are nearsighted out of water.
streamlined bodie
large flippers
make them remarkably adapted to life at sea.
Lifespan
: Estimated to be
60-70 years.
Conservation Status:
IUCN Red List: Endangered
Click to View More
Source :
Green sea turtle carcass washes ashore on Marina beach
Environment & Ecology
**********Reunion Island
At least four people died after cyclone Garance struck the French overseas territory of La Reunion recently.
About Reunion Island:
It is a
French island
in the
Western Indian Ocean.
It lies about 680 km
east of Madagascar
and 180 km
southwest of Mauritius.
It covers an area of 2,511 sq. km.
With Mauritius and Rodrigues Islands, they form the
Mascarene Archipelago.
The island is
entirely volcanic
and originates on the ocean floor at a depth of 4,000 meters.
It consists mainly of
rugged mountains dissected by torrential rivers
It is home to the
highest peak in the Indian Ocean, the Piton des Neige
s, and one of the
most active volcanoes
on the planet, the
Piton de la Fournaise.
capital is Saint-Denis
, on the northern coast.
People:
Réunion was first
settled in the 17th century by colonists from France.
Slave labourers were brought
in from East Africa to work on plantations, and later Malays, Annamites, Chinese, and Malabar Indians were imported as indentured labourers.
Today the greatest proportion of the population is of
mixed descent (African, European, and South Asian).
Its
economy
is based largely on the
export of sugar.
Other products include meat and milk products, rum, molasses, tobacco, geranium essence, and vanilla.
Click to View More
Source :
Four dead after cyclone Garance hits French island of La Reunion
Geography
**********What is the Meteor Missile?
A US Marine Corps (USMC) F-35B Lightning II recently flew its first-ever test missions with the Meteor air-to-air missile.
About Meteor Missile:
It is an advanced
radar-guided, beyond-visual-range air-to-air missile (BVRAAM).
METEOR has been
developed by a group of European partners led by MBDA
to meet the needs of six European nations: the
UK, Germany, Italy, France, Spain and Sweden
Features
It has a length of 3.65 m and a diameter of 0.178 m.
Unlike most similar solid-fuel missiles, the Meteor is equipped with a
ramjet engine,
which a
llows for controlled flight speed, complex maneuver
s, and a
range of more than 100 kilometers.
Designed for a
speed greater than Mach 4
, the missile has a large no-escape zone.
Guided by an
advanced active radar seeker,
Meteor provides all-weather capability to engage a wide variety of targets from agile fast jets to small UAVs and cruise missiles.
It is equipped with a
two-way datalink
, which allows the launch platform to provide
updates on targets or re-targeting
when the missile is in flight.
The datalink is capable of transmitting information such as kinematic status. It also notifies target acquisition by the seeker.
The missile is equipped with a
blast-fragmentation warhead.
Click to View More
Source :
F-35B Flies With Meteor BVR Missile For The 1st Time; Here’s What Makes F-35-Meteor Combo Truly Deadly
Science & Tech
**********Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary
The high court recently issued notices to South Western Railway and the Directorate of Survey and Land Records (DSLR) over a PIL challenging acquisition proceedings taking place for land at Bhagwan Mahavir (Mollem) Wildlife Sanctuary.
About Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary:
Nestled in the
Western Ghats,
it is located on the eastern border of the state of
Goa
, near the village of Mollem.
Originally known as the Mollem Game Sanctuary,
it was declared a wildlife sanctuary in 1969 and then renamed the Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary.
The sanctuary
includes the Mollem National Park.
It covers an area of 240 sq. km.
It is also home to the famous
Dudhsagar waterfall,
Devil’s Canyon
, the
Tambdi Surla templ
e, the
Tambdi fall
s, and a number of other historic and religious sites.
Vegetation
: West Coast
tropical evergreen forests,
semi-evergree
n forests, and
moist deciduous
Flora
Teak, bamboo, cashew,
and eucalyptus trees dominate the landscape.
Fauna
Gaur, Sambar, Leopards, Spotted Deer, Slender Tories, J
ungle Cats, Malayan Giant Squirrels, Pythons, and Cobras.
Click to View More
Source :
HC notice to railways over land acquisition at Mollem
Environment & Ecology
**********Geological Survey of India
The Geological Survey of India (GSI), one of the oldest scientific organizations in the country, is set to celebrate its 175th year of geoscientific legacy.
About Geological Survey of India:
It was set up in
1851 by Sir Thomas Oldham, primarily
to find
coal deposits
for the Railways.
Over the years, it has grown into a
repository of geo-science information
required in various fields in the country.
Role:
It includes providing objective,
impartial and up-to-date geological expertise
and geoscientific information of all kinds, with a focus on policy-making decisions, and commercial and socio-economic needs.
It also emphasises systematic documentation of all geological processes, both surface and subsurface, of India and its offshore areas.
The organisation carries out this work through geological, geophysical, & geochemical surveys using the latest and most cost-effective techniques and methodologies.
The main functions of the GSI relate to the
creation and updation of national geoscientific
and mineral resource assessment.
It has played a pioneering role in
geological mapping, mineral exploration
, disaster studies, and geoscientific research, significantly contributing to India’s industrial and economic growth.
Headquarter
: It is headquartered in
Kolkata
and has six regional offices located at Lucknow, Jaipur, Nagpur, Hyderabad, Shillong and Kolkata. Every state has a state unit.
Nodal Ministry:
Presently, GSI is an attached office to the
Ministry of Mines.
Click to View More
Source :
Union Minister for Coal and Mines, Shri G. Kishan Reddy to Inaugurate 175th Foundation Day Celebrations of Geological Survey of India at Kolkata on 4th March 2025
Geography
**********Lankamalleswara Wildlife Sanctuary
Recently, the Archaeological Survey of India’s epigraphical survey in Sri Lankamalleswara Wildlife Sanctuary in Kadapa district has made major findings of three rock shelters and rock paintings along with 30 inscriptions.
About Lankamalleswara Wildlife Sanctuary:
It is located in the Kadapa district of
Andhra Pradesh.
Rivers:
The Sanctuary forms the catchment for
river Pennar.
Telugu ganga canal
flows into the eastern flank of the Sanctuary draining into the 'Pennar river'.
Vegetation:
It consists of
Southern tropical dry deciduous forest
in the hills, scrub forest in the plains,
Southern dry mixed deciduous forest
, Tropical thorn forests and
Tropical dry evergreen forest
Flora
The rare and endangered plants like
Red sanders and Sandalwood
are important species found in this area.
The riparian vegetation is very in rich in floristic value, consisting of Terminalia spp, Syzygium spp, (Jamun), Wild mangoes, Anogeissus latifolia, Phoenix spp, Bamboo, Hardwickia binata, etc.
Fauna:
It has good representation of species like
Common toad
, Bull frog, Common Indian skink, Green vine snake etc.
It is the only home and hope for the rare and endangered bird the
Jerdons courser
Click to View More
Source :
Andhra Pradesh: ASI finds ancient rock art, inscriptions in Lankamalleswara sanctuary
Environment & Ecology
**********Banjara Community
Recently, the Lok Sabha Speaker addressed to the members of Banjara community at the 286th birth anniversary celebration of Sant Sewalal Maharaja at Dr Ambedkar International Centre, New Delhi.
About Banjara Community:
Banjara is made of various groups found throughout India and most of them are found in Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka states.
This community settled across the country
with different names, have permanently abandoned their nomadic lifestyle and settled in their settlements called
Tandas
Language:
They speak
Gor Boli
also
Lambadi
which belongs to the Indo-Aryan Group of Languages.
Lambadi has no script.
The majority of Banjara in India are Hindu; some have combined
Hindu practices with their own animistic beliefs.
Culture:
Banjara people celebrate the
festival of Teej
during Shravanam (in the month of august). In this festival young unmarried Banjara girls pray for a good groom.
Fire dance and Chari
are the traditional dance forms of the banjara people.
Tattoos are very common
in banjara community. Like the banjara costume, Tattoo also express their personal style, identity and family connect.
About Santh Sevalal Maharaj:
He is considered a
social reformer
and spiritual teacher of the Banjara community.
He travelled across the country with
his Ladeniya Troup
to serve especially the forest dwellers and nomadic tribes.
Due
his extraordinary knowledge, excellent skills and spiritual background in Ayurveda and Naturopathy, he was able to dispel
and eradicate myths and superstitions prevalent in the tribal communities.
Click to View More
Source :
BANJARA COMMUNITY PLAYS AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN PROTECTING NATURE AND TRADITION OF THE COUNTRY: LOK SABHA SPEAKER
Geography
**********Maple Syrup Urine Disease
Recently, scientists have created a new gene therapy for a debilitating genetic disorder called maple syrup urine disease (MSUD).
About Maple Syrup Urine Disease:
It is a
rare genetic disorder
characterized by
deficiency of an enzyme complex
(branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase) that is required to
break down
(metabolize) the three
branched-chain amino acids
(BCAAs)
leucine, isoleucine and valine
, in the body.
It’s inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
. A child is born with MSUD when both parents are carriers of the specific gene mutation and pass it on.
The loss of this complex prevents the body from properly breaking down several amino acids, eventually leading to
neurological symptoms
life-threatening brain damage.
Types
Classic:
It is the
most severe and
also the most common. Symptoms usually develop within the
first three days of birth.
Intermediate:
less severe than
classic MSUD. Symptoms typically appear in children between 5 months and 7 years old.
Intermittent:
Children with intermittent MSUD develop as expected until an infection or period of stress causes symptoms to appear. People with intermittent MSUD usually tolerate higher levels of the three amino acids than those with classic MSUD.
Thiamine-responsive:
This type of MSUD
responds to treatment using high doses of vitamin B1
(thiamine) along with a restricted diet.
Symptoms:
A sweet, syrupy smell in their pee, sweat or earwax
Lethargy (they may move slowly or appear tired or weak)
Irritability or fussiness
Treatment:
The main treatment for MSUD is a
low-protein diet
with low levels of the three amino acids.
Click to View More
Source :
Gene therapy for maple syrup urine disease shows promise
Science & Tech
**********Giloy
The data from PubMed, a globally recognised database for biomedical and life sciences research, reveals a staggering 376.5% increase in the number of research publications around Giloy (Tinospora cordifolia) over the past decade.
About Giloy:
It is commonly known as
Guduchi
and familiar as
Amrita in Sanskrit
, which translates to the ‘herb of immortality’, because of its abundant beneficial propert
It is a
popular herb
and has been used in therapeutics for a long
time in Ayush systems.
Distribution:
It is large climber with succulent, corky and grooved stems. It is found almost throughout India.
Parts Used:
Stem, leaves, root are used for many purposes.
It grows well in
almost all types of soils
and under varying climatic conditions. The plant is cultivated by stem cutting in the month of May-June.
Uses:
It is commonly used in the
management of fevers
. It is one of the important herbs for the management of gouty arthritis.
The increasing number of clinical studies and laboratory research suggests that Giloy may have a
significant role in cancer therapy
autoimmune disease management, and even inflammatory disorders
Click to View More
Source :
Giloy Takes the Global Stage: Research Publications Soar Over 300% in a Decade
Science & Tech
**********India is staring at an obesity challenge
Why in news?
Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his recent Mann Ki Baat address, highlighted the rising obesity crisis in India, particularly among children, noting that one in eight Indians is affected. He urged people to cut oil consumption by 10% each month and emphasized the need to tackle obesity for a healthier nation.
Following up on social media, he nominated prominent personalities to raise awareness and strengthen the fight against obesity.
What’s in today’s article?
Scale of Obesity in India
Health Risks Associated with Obesity
Reasons for Rising Obesity in India
Obesity in India has been increasing steadily, as indicated by the National Family Health Surveys (NFHS).
The percentage of overweight/obese women rose from 20.6% (NFHS-4, 2015-16) to 24% (NFHS-5, 2019-21), while for men, it increased from 18.9% to 22.9%.
Urban areas recorded significantly higher obesity rates than rural regions.
Abdominal Obesity Concerns
A 2023 study in The Lancet Regional Health Southeast Asia found that abdominal obesity, measured by waist circumference, affected 40% of women and 12% of men in India.
Childhood Obesity on the Rise
Childhood obesity is a growing concern. NFHS data shows that the percentage of overweight children under 5 years increased from 2.1% (2015-16) to 3.4% (2019-21).
Projections from the World Obesity Atlas 2022 estimate that by 2030,
obesity prevalence will reach 10.81% among children aged 5-9 years and 6.23% among those aged 10-19 years
Obesity is often referred to as the "mother of all diseases" due to its strong link to life-threatening conditions.
According to the WHO, obesity significantly increases the risk of:
Cardiovascular diseases
– A leading cause of death and disability in India, occurring about 10 years earlier than in other countries.
Diabetes
– India has the highest number of diabetes cases globally, with 101 million affected.
Cancer
– The number of cancer cases is projected to rise from 14.6 lakh in 2022 to 15.7 lakh in 2025, as per ICMR data.
Osteoarthritis
– A common obesity-related joint disorder.
Impact of Childhood Obesity
Excess weight in childhood and adolescence poses immediate and long-term risks, including:
Increased likelihood of developing
non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
earlier in life.
Adverse
psychosocial effects
, such as stigma, discrimination, bullying, and lower academic performance.
Higher chances of
obesity persisting into adulthood
, leading to further health complications.
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) now account for about
60% of all deaths in India
, making obesity a critical public health concern.
Unhealthy Diets and Processed Foods
The increasing consumption of ultra-processed foods and unhealthy diets is a major driver of obesity in urban India.
These foods contribute to
visceral fat accumulation
and increase the risk of cardio-metabolic diseases.
Nutritional Deficiencies and Economic Barriers
Low-income households, especially those relying on the
public distribution system
, consume more carbohydrates (rice and wheat) due to affordability issues.
Nutrient-rich foods like
fruits, vegetables, pulses, dairy, and animal-based foods
are expensive, making healthy eating inaccessible to many.
While obesity is currently more prevalent among urban middle-class populations, it is rising among the
rural poor
as well.
Lack of Physical Activity
A study in The Lancet Global Health found that
nearly half of all Indians
do not get sufficient physical activity.
Indoor sedentariness due to desk jobs and digital devices, combined with unsafe and uninviting outdoor environments, limits exercise.
Factors such as:
Lack of cycling lanes and pedestrian pathways
Poorly lit streets and rising crime rates
Shrinking green spaces for recreation
discourage physical activity, leading to higher obesity rates in cities and towns.
Environmental Factors
Air pollution contributes to inflammation and metabolic disorders, further increasing obesity risk.
Without clean, green, and safe urban environments, physical activity remains difficult, fueling obesity growth.
India is staring at an obesity challenge.pdf
( Size:  293.5 KB  )
Click to View More
Social Issues
**********UGC’s New Draft Rules Limit ‘Caste-Based Discrimination’ to SC/ST Communities
Why in news?
The Union government informed the Supreme Court that new UGC regulations will empower it to de-recognise higher education institutions failing to prevent discrimination, particularly based on religion or caste.
What’s in today’s article?
Caste-Based Discrimination in Indian Universities
UGC’s New Draft Regulations Empower It to Act Against Discrimination in Universities
Caste-based discrimination in Indian universities refers to systemic exclusion, harassment, and bias faced by students from Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST), and Other Backward Classes (OBCs).
This manifests in academic grading, social ostracization, denial of opportunities, and even psychological harassment, often leading to dropouts or severe mental distress.
Statistics
Discrimination in IITs
A 2021 study by the Forum Against Oppression of SC/STs reported that 70% of Dalit and Adivasi students in IITs faced caste discrimination.
They faced discrimination from faculty members, including unfair grading and exclusion from academic projects.
Admissions
In 2015–2019, only 1.6% of PhD candidates at IIT-Bombay were from the ST category, 7.5% from the SC category, and 19.2% from the OBC category.
Placements
A field experiment found that low-caste applicants need to send 20 percent more resumes than high-caste applicants to get the same callback.
Suicides
As per the ministry of education, between 2014 and 2021,
over 122 student suicides in higher education institutions were reported, a significant proportion belonging to marginalized communities
Notable Examples
Rohith Vemula (2016)
: A Ph.D. scholar from the University of Hyderabad, who died by suicide, alleging caste discrimination and institutional harassment.
Payal Tadvi (2019)
: A tribal medical student from Mumbai, who ended her life due to casteist bullying by senior doctors.
Reports of caste-based seating arrangements in universities and social exclusion from hostels and student groups persist.
Legal Mechanism to Address Caste Discrimination
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
: Provides legal protection against caste-based violence and discrimination.
The University Grants Commission (UGC) Guidelines
: Mandates universities to establish anti-discrimination cells to address caste bias.
Article 15 & 17 of the Indian Constitution
: Prohibits caste-based discrimination and untouchability in all forms.
Reservation Policy
: Ensures representation of SC/ST/OBC students in admissions, faculty positions, and scholarships.
Challenges
Lack of SC, ST, and OBC faculty members contributes to student alienation.
Adequate representation could provide mentorship and support to marginalized students.
Many IITs, IIMs, and law schools failed to respond to UGC’s request for data on Equal Opportunity Cells.
Reports indicate that 40% of universities and 80% of colleges have not provided compliance details.
SC has acknowledged the
low compliance rate
and stressed the need for stronger enforcement.
Way forward
Need to change flawed notion of meritocracy
The claim that reservations dilute merit is a common but baseless argument.
Sociologists argue that so-called "merit" is simply the conversion of historical caste privilege into modern social capital.
Supreme Court in 2022 (Neil Aurelio Nunes vs Union of India)
affirmed that reservation enhances merit by ensuring equitable representation.
Legal Framework
: The
UGC should criminalize caste discrimination
in educational institutions, similar to laws against ragging and sexual harassment.
Institutional Support
: The government must implement grievance redressal mechanisms, diversity training, and pedagogical strategies to promote inclusion.
Awareness and Structural Changes
: Caste annihilation workshops and affirmative action policies must be reinforced to foster equitable campuses.
Conclusion
As Dr. B.R. Ambedkar stated, “Equality may be a fiction, but nonetheless, one must accept it as a governing principle.”
To ensure true inclusivity in Indian academia, proactive steps must be taken to dismantle caste-based barriers and create a just, representative educational system.
The Union govt informed the Supreme Court that the
draft UGC (Promotion of Equity in Higher Education Institutions) Regulations, 2025
would strengthen the UGC’s authority to tackle caste and religion-based discrimination.
Petition Against Caste Discrimination in Universities
The court was hearing a petition filed by the mothers of Rohith Vemula and Payal Tadvi, who died by suicide after facing caste discrimination.
The petition highlighted rampant caste bias in higher education institutions (HEIs), urging the Supreme Court to intervene.
Key Provisions of the Draft Regulations
Objective
: Eradication of discrimination based on caste, religion, race, gender, or economic background.
Punitive Actions
: HEIs failing to comply may face
de-recognition, funding restrictions (Section 12B of the UGC Act), and additional penalties
Equity Committees
: Proposed in HEIs, consisting of faculty, students, and civil society members, with mandatory SC/ST and female representation.
UGC’s New Draft Rules Limit Caste-Based Discrimination to SC ST Communities.pdf
( Size:  316.0 KB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Contentious Amendments to the Advocates Act and Their Implications
Why in the News?
On February 22, 2025, the Centre withdrew the contentious Advocates (Amendment) Bill, 2025, stating that a revised version incorporating public feedback would be introduced.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Advocates Amendment Bill (Context, Key Provisions, Controversies, Future Prospects, etc.)
Introduction:
The Union Ministry of Law and Justice withdrew the
, following strong opposition from the legal community.
The Bill sought to amend the
Advocates Act, 1961
, which governs the legal profession in India.
However, lawyers and the
Bar Council of India
(BCI) raised concerns that the amendments would undermine the independence of legal institutions, restrict protests, and give excessive power to the government.
In response to nationwide strikes and legal representations, the government decided to withdraw the Bill and reconsider the proposed changes.
Key Provisions and Controversies:
Government Influence Over the Bar Council of India (BCI)
The Bill proposed allowing the
central government to nominate up to three members to the BCI
Currently, the BCI is an independent body that regulates the legal profession in India.
Critics argued that government-appointed members could compromise the council’s autonomy and lead to political interference in legal matters.
Additionally, the proposed
Section 49B
would have empowered the central government to issue directions to the BCI
, effectively giving it control over key decisions.
The BCI strongly opposed this provision, stating that it would erode the self-regulatory nature of the legal profession.
Restrictions on Lawyers' Right to Protest
One of the most contentious provisions was
Section 35A
, which aimed to ban strikes and boycotts by lawyers.
It stated that any form of abstention from work, or obstruction in court functioning, would be considered misconduct, punishable under the Advocates Act.
Lawyers strongly opposed this provision, arguing that the right to protest is fundamental in a democracy.
They highlighted past cases where lawyers used strikes to oppose unjust laws and administrative issues. Critics pointed out that while excessive strikes could delay justice, an outright ban would be unjustified.
Entry of Foreign Law Firms and Lawyers
The Bill sought to empower the central government to regulate the entry of foreign law firms and lawyers into India.
The Supreme Court had earlier ruled in
Bar Council of India v. A.K. Balaji (2018)
foreign lawyers could offer legal advice on a temporary basis but could not practice law in India
In 2023, the BCI introduced rules allowing foreign law firms to operate in areas such as international arbitration, but they remained barred from court litigation.
The Bill would have transferred this regulatory power from the BCI to the government, raising concerns about its impact on Indian lawyers.
Expanded Definition of 'Legal Practitioner'
The Bill proposed broadening the definition of ‘legal practitioner’ to include corporate lawyers and lawyers associated with foreign law firms.
Traditionally, this definition only included practicing advocates, pleaders, and revenue agents. The BCI opposed this move, arguing that it would dilute professional standards and create legal ambiguities.
New Misconduct Provisions and Penalties
The Bill introduced additional provisions on lawyer misconduct, including:
Allowing clients to file misconduct complaints against lawyers if they faced financial loss due to legal proceedings.
Imposing monetary fines of up to ₹3 lakh on advocates found guilty of misconduct.
Allowing state bar councils to impose fines of ₹50,000 on clients who file frivolous complaints.
Lawyers argued that holding them financially liable for client losses was unfair, as legal outcomes depend on judicial decisions, not just advocacy.
Future Prospects and The Way Forward:
While the Bill has been withdrawn, the government has stated that it will introduce a revised draft after consultations with stakeholders. Key areas for reconsideration include:
Ensuring the BCI remains independent and self-regulated.
Balancing the right to protest with judicial efficiency.
Revisiting foreign law firm regulations in consultation with legal bodies.
Refining the definition of legal practitioners to avoid ambiguity.
Legal experts suggest that future amendments should focus on improving legal education, streamlining disciplinary mechanisms, and enhancing access to justice while maintaining the autonomy of the legal profession.
Conclusion:
The withdrawal of the Advocates (Amendment) Bill highlights the importance of protecting the independence of the legal profession.
While legal reforms are necessary, they must be framed in consultation with legal stakeholders to ensure they strengthen, rather than weaken, the judiciary.
The government’s decision to reconsider the Bill reflects a recognition of these concerns. Future discussions must aim for a balanced approach that upholds legal ethics while promoting judicial efficiency.
The contentious amendments to the Advocates Act and their implications.pdf
( Size:  310.1 KB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********Challenges Faced by Elected Women Representatives in Panchayati Raj System
Why in News?
A report by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj panel, chaired by former Mines Secretary Sushil Kumar, has highlighted various
challenges that prevent Elected Women Representatives (EWRs) from exercising their authority independently
.
These challenges include
socio-cultural norms, patriarchal biases
, lack of deterrent laws, and inadequate political experience.
The report
recommends policy interventions
, structural reforms, and strict penalties to curb the practice of
'Pradhan Pati', 'Sarpanch Pati', or 'Mukhiya Pati
'.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background
Key Challenges Identified
Recommendations and Way Forward
Conclusion
Background:
The committee was formed in September 2023 following
a Supreme Court order
(July 6, 2023).
It conducted four regional workshops
, engaging representatives from 14 states, including MP, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, UP, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, etc.
The findings
are based on interactions with state governments, EWRs, and local stakeholders.
Key Challenges Identified:
Lack of political experience:
Newly elected women representatives often lack exposure and experience.
They
struggle to discharge responsibilities effectively
at different levels of the Panchayati Raj system, especially at the Gram Panchayat level.
Gender-based discrimination:
Women representatives are
often ignored
in official and informal meetings.
Male elected representatives and officials prefer interacting with male counterparts.
This reinforces the
dominance of male proxies
limits women's leadership roles.
Patriarchal socio-cultural norms:
Rural society continues to follow
traditional gender roles and restrictive norms
such as
'purdah'
Women are discouraged from speaking in male-dominated gatherings, including panchayat meetings. These practices limit their participation in governance.
Political pressure and threats:
Women representatives face
coercion, threats, and sometimes violence
from political opponents and dominant groups.
'No Confidence Motion' is often misused a
s a tactic to remove them from office.
Socio-economic and cultural disadvantages:
Many EWRs belong to
marginalized communities
(SC/ST/Minorities/Disabled),
increasing their vulnerabilities.
The burden of balancing domestic and political responsibilities limits their ability to function effectively.
Due to societal norms and
lack of confidence,
they
hesitate in making financial decisions independently.
Lack of training and mentorship:
Women representatives have limited access to training programs that can enhance their leadership skills.
Absence of mentorship restricts their ability to navigate political challenges.
Rotational reservation system:
The five-year term for reserved seats is
too short for women to gain experience
and establish themselves as leaders.
It disrupts continuity in governance
and weakens women's long-term political impact.
Weak legal deterrence:
Existing legal provisions
to penalize male relatives acting as proxies are
insufficient
Male relatives continue to control decision-making,
undermining the de jure authority of EWRs.
Recommendations and Way Forward:
Policy interventions:
Strengthen training programs and provide legal awareness to EWRs.
Structural reforms:
Extend the duration of reservation to ensure leadership continuity.
Exemplary penalties:
Enforce strict laws against male relatives functioning as proxies.
Capacity building:
Enhance mentorship and skill development initiatives for women leaders.
Awareness campaigns:
Promote gender sensitization at all levels of governance.
Conclusion:
The report underscores the
urgent need to address systemic challenges
that hinder women's effective participation in local governance.
By implementing the recommended reforms, the government can empower EWRs, ensuring their constitutional rights and leadership roles are upheld in the Panchayati Raj system.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  423.2 KB  )
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********