State of Global Water Resource Report 2023
According to the State of Global Water Resource Report 2023, the year 2023 marked the driest year for global rivers in over three decades.
About State of Global Water Resource Report:
It is an annual report published by the
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
since 2021.
It offers a comprehensive and consistent
overview of water resources worldwide
It is based on input from dozens of National Meteorological and Hydrological Services and other organizations and experts.
Highlights of the 2023 Report:
The year
driest year for global rivers in 33 years
last five consecutive years
have recorded widespread
below-normal conditions for river flows,
with reservoir inflows following a similar pattern.
It notes that 2023 was also the second consecutive year in which all regions in the world with glaciers reported ice loss, the year in which “
glaciers suffered the largest mass loss ever registered in 50 years.
More than 600 gigatons (Gt) of water were lost across all glaciated regions of the world.
The report says that
6 billion people
currently
face inadequate access to
water at least one month a year, and this is expected to increase to more than 5 billion by 2050.
The world is
far off-track with Sustainable Development Goal 6
on water and sanitation.
Click to View More
Source :
2023 driest year for global rivers in over three decades: WMO report
Environment
**********World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA)
The World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA) recently suspended the membership of the Delhi Zoo over concerns about the treatment of its lone African elephant named Shankar.
About World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA):
It is the
umbrella organization
for the
World Zoo and Aquarium community.
Established in 1935
, it is the
only organisation representing zoos and aquariums
at the global level.
WAZA’s mission is to guide, encourage, and support the zoos, aquariums, and like-minded organisations of the world in animal care and welfare, environmental education, and global conservation.
Its
include leading
, and regional and national
Associations
of Zoos and Aquariums, as well as some
affiliate organizations
, such as
zoo veterinarians or zoo educator
s, from all around the world.
Some of the activities
of WAZA are:
Promoting cooperation
between zoological gardens and aquariums in relation to the conservation, management, and breeding of animals in captivity.
Encouraging highest standards
of animal welfare
and husbandry.
Promoting and
coordinating cooperation between national and regional associations
and their constituents.
Assist in representing zoological gardens and aquariums in other international organizations or assemblies.
wildlife conservation, environmental research
, and environmental
WAZA has
formed partnerships with
leading international
conservation organisations.
Together, they are committed
to tackling global issues
such as the
illegal wildlife trade, coral‑reef restoration
, marine litter,
sustainable palm oil
and climate change.
Click to View More
Source :
Global body suspends Delhi zoo membership on welfare of its lone African elephant
Environment
**********What are Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs)?
A diet rich in Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs) is among the leading causes of India being the world’s diabetic capital, notes a first-of-its-kind clinical trial finding published recently.
About Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs):
AGEs (also known as
glycotoxins
) are
harmful molecules
formed by the
glycation and oxidation of lipids and proteins.
is the process of
combining other molecules with sugars.
Oxidation is the process of combining other molecules with oxygen.
AGEs are formed in your body by metabolism, but the major source of AGEs is food.
They are formed in food by grilling, toasting, roasting, broiling, frying, and other high-temperature cooking.
Tobacco use
is yet another source of AGEs.
AGE production
in the body increases with age.
Why are AGEs harmful?
present in the body at all times
. At low levels, they don't cause significant injury.
However, they
cause cell and tissue damage
when they reach
high concentrations.
AGEs combine with receptors located on blood vessels and several other organs to cause damage to organ systems.
These compounds can impact the function of proteins within the cells, alter the behavior of
hormones, cytokines, and free radicals,
and modify the extracellular matrix between cells.
activate inflammatory
and other destructive processes
in many systems of your body.
AGEs are involved in the development of various
chronic inflammatory diseases
such as
type II diabetes mellitus,
vascular and
cardiovascular diseases,
osteoporosis, and
arthritis
Hyperglycemia
high blood levels of glucose)
is one condition associated with more AGE production, causing blood vessel damage in people with diabetes.
Click to View More
Source :
Consumption of ultra-processed and fast foods leading cause of diabetes in India, reveals new study
Science & Tech
**********What is Rudder?
The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) recently asked operators of Boeing 737 aircraft with a specific rudder part to not use the planes for low-visibility landings due to a “possible risk of jamming”.
About Rudder:
The rudder is a
primary flight control surface
which
controls rotation about
vertical axis
of an aircraft. This movement is
referred to as "yaw".
It is a movable surface that is mounted on the trailing edge of the vertical stabilizer or fin.
Unlike a boat
, the rudder is
not used to steer the aircraft
; rather, it is
used to overcome adverse yaw
induced by turning or, in the case of a multi-engine aircraft, by engine failure and
also allows
aircraft to be intentionally slipped when required
In most aircraft, the rudder is controlled through the flight deck rudder pedals which are linked mechanically to the rudder.
Deflection of a rudder pedal
causes a
corresponding rudder deflection
in the same direction; that is, pushing the left rudder pedal will result in a rudder deflection to the left.
This, in turn,
causes the rotation about the vertical axis moving the aircraft
nose to the left.
In large or high-speed aircraft, hydraulic actuators are often used to help overcome mechanical and aerodynamic loads on the rudder surface.
Rudder effectiveness increases with aircraft speed
. Thus, at slow speed, large rudder input may be required to achieve the desired results.
Smaller rudder movement is required at higher speeds, and, in many more sophisticated aircraft, rudder travel is automatically limited when the aircraft is flown above manoeuvring speed to prevent deflection angles that could potentially result in structural damage to the aircraft.
Click to View More
Source :
Boeing 737 planes with a specific rudder part not to be used for low-visibility landings: DGCA
Science & Tech
**********What is Ni-kshay Poshan Yojana (NPY)?
The Union Health Ministry has doubled the monthly nutrition support under Ni-Kshay Poshan Yojana from the existing Rs 500 to Rs 1,000 per month for all TB patients, during treatment.
About Ni-kshay Poshan Yojana (NPY):
NPY was launched by the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&FW)
as a centrally sponsored scheme under the National Health Mission (NHM) in April 2018.
It is a
direct benefit transfer
(DBT) scheme under the
National Tuberculosis Elimination Program (NTEP)
in India.
Objective:
Provide incentives for nutritional support to tuberculosis (TB) patients.
Beneficiary:
All notified TB patients are beneficiaries of the scheme.
Eligibility
All patients with
who are
notified to the government
on or
after April 1, 2018,
including those who are already being treated for TB, are eligible for financial incentives.
To be eligible for the incentives, patients
must be registered
or notified
on the NIKSHAY portal.
Benefits
: Financial incentive of
1000/- per month
for each notified TB patient for the duration for which the patient is on anti-TB treatment.
The incentives can be
distributed in Cash (only via DBT,
preferably through Aadhaar-enabled bank accounts) or in-kind.
This scheme is
implemented across all States and UTs
Click to View More
Source :
Health ministry enhances monthly support for TB patients
Science & Tech
**********Black Carbon
According to a new study, India’s reliance on kerosene-based lamps accounts for about 10 per cent of the total residential black carbon emissions.
About
Black Carbon:
It is commonly
known as soot
and is a component of
fine particulate air pollution
(PM2.5).
It is formed by the
incomplete combustion of wood and fossil fuels
, a process which also creates carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide, and volatile organic compounds.
Most black carbon emissions in India arise from burning biomass, such as cow dung or straw, in traditional cookstoves.
It has a warming impact on climate that is 460-1,500 times stronger than CO2.
Impacts on Environment and Human Health
It warms the atmosphere because it is
very effective at absorbing light
It exacerbates the warming of the air and surfaces in regions where it is concentrated, altering weather patterns and ecosystem cycles.
lasts only days to weeks
in the atmosphere but has significant direct and indirect impacts on the climate, snow and ice, agriculture, and human health.
It also influences cloud formation and impacts regional circulation and rainfall patterns.
When deposited on ice and snow, black carbon and co-emitted particles reduce surface albedo (the ability to reflect sunlight) and heat the surface.
It contributes to global warming and poses severe risks. Studies have found a direct link between exposure to black carbon and a
higher risk of heart disease
, birth complications, and premature death.
Click to View More
Source :
India’s potent black carbon emissions from kerosene lamps make up 10% of total residential emissions: Study
**********World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA) of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) will be held in New Delhi from October 14 to 24, 2024.
About
World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly:
It has been held every
four years since 2002.
It serves as the governing conference of the
(ITU) Standardisation Sector (ITU-T).
It is one of the three world conferences organized by the International Telecommunication Union.
It defines the work program, working methods, and structure of study groups” for ITU’s Telecommunication Standardization Sector
This event plays a pivotal role in
setting global telecommunication standards
, making India’s hosting of the WTSA a significant milestone.
WTSA 2024 will be preceded by the
Global Standards Symposium
(GSS) on October 14, 2024, at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi.
The GSS is a high-level forum for policy debates on ICT standardization, addressing its evolving dynamics and technical implications.
Key facts about International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
It is the
United Nations specialized agency
for information and communication technologies.
It was
established in 1865
as the International Telegraph Union.
In 1947 the ITU became a specialised agency of the United Nations.
It is an intergovernmental organization that coordinates between governments and private sector bodies to global telecommunication and information communication technology (ICT) services.
Member countries:
It has a membership of 193 countries and more than 1000 companies, universities and international and regional organizations.
Functions:
allocate global radio spectrum and satellite orbits;
coordination and setting of technical standards related to telecommunication/ICT;
work to improve access to ICTs in underserved communities worldwide;
India and ITU:
India has been an active member of the ITU since 1869 and has been a regular member of the ITU Council since 1952.
Headquarters:
Geneva, Switzerland.
Click to View More
Source :
India to host ITU-WTSA24 during October 14th- 24th in New Delhi: The first ever in Asia Pacific region
Economy
**********Unified Genomic Chip
Recently, the Prime Minister of India launched two programs of the Animal Husbandry Department for the benefit of the livestock - ' Indigenous Sex Sorted Semen' and ' Unified Genomic Chip'.
About
Unified Genomic Chip:
It is aimed at helping
farmers identify high-quality cattle
early and enhance dairy farming efficiency in India.
The chip comes in
two versions
The ‘
Gau Chip’
for cattle and the ‘
Mahish Chip’
for buffalo.
It is developed by the
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying
(DAHD), under the Ministry of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
Purpose:
The purpose of this chip is to help farmers make informed decisions on animal selection by identifying young, high-quality bulls at an early age.
Benefit:
The chip is
tailored for Indian cattle breeds
and will help improve the quality of cattle and enhance the dairy farming sector.
Key points about the Sex Sorted Semen Technology
Sex Sorted Semen is the 'gender selected' semen
used by Artificial Insemination
(AI) for cattle and buffaloes to produce more than 90% selected gender (females).
It is very effective in breed improvement and till now it was manufactured by multinational companies.
National Dairy Development Board
under the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, has developed the indigenous technology of sex-sorted semen worth Rs. 250.
Technology used:
IVF technology (commonly known as test tube baby technology) is also being used for this purpose.
DAHD target:
It has now planned to produce a minimum of
10 lakh sexed semen doses annually
for the ongoing artificial insemination (AI) programme.
Click to View More
Source :
PM Modi launches Unified Genomic Chip for cattle: How will it help farmers?
Science & Tech
**********What is microRNA?
The 2024 Nobel Prize for Medicine has been awarded to scientists Victor Ambros and Gary Ruvkun for their discovery of microRNA — tiny molecules which play a crucial role in how genes function.
About
microRNA:
MicroRNAs, or miRNAs, are small,
non-coding molecules of RNA
They are typically around 19-24 nucleotides long and play an important role in determining how much messenger RNA (mRNA), which carries genetic information, eventually gets translated into protein.
Role in human body
These microRNAs act as molecular switches, fine-tuning the
expression of genes
in different cell types and
under varying conditions.
regulate the production of proteins
by bonding with and subsequently silencing the mRNA at an appropriate juncture. The process is called post-transcriptional gene regulation.
MicroRNAs help
fine-tune various cellular processes
like development, growth, and metabolism. Their role is essential in maintaining normal cell function, and disruptions in microRNA activity have been linked to diseases such as cancer.
Mutations in genes coding for microRNAs have been found in humans, causing conditions such as congenital hearing loss, eye and skeletal disorders.
Significance of microRNA discovery
The discovery of microRNAs has provided scientists with new tools to investigate gene regulation and has significantly expanded our understanding of how genetic information is processed and utilized in living organisms.
Click to View More
Source :
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2024: What is the research that won the prize? | Explained
Science & Tech
**********Indian Wild Ass
The population of wild asses in Gujarat has been estimated at 7,672, as per the 10th Wild Ass Population Estimation (WAPE) conducted by the Gujarat government earlier this year.
About
Indian Wild Ass:
It is a sub-species of
Asian Wild Ass
(Equus hemionus).
It is locally
called khur
in the Gujarat region.
It possesses remarkable characteristics, such as its ability to
survive in the extreme conditions
of Gujarat’s Wild Ass Sanctuary.
The primary food source for these animals is the grass that grows on the islands in the desert.
Appearance:
It is characterised by distinctive
white markings
anterior part of the rump
and on the posterior part of the shoulder and a stripe down the back that is bordered by white.
Distribution:
The khur was formerly widespread in the arid zone of northwestern India and Pakistan, westwards through much of central Asia. It is now limited to
the Little Rann of Kutch in Gujarat.
Habitat:
Desert and grassland ecosystems.
Conservation Status:
IUCN:
Near threatened.
CITES:
Appendix II
Wildlife Protection Act (1972):
Schedule-I
Ecological Significance:
It is helpful in
seed dispersal
in the area which helps in promoting vegetation growth and diversity. Besides, it is helpful in
habitat creation
for other species as it clears pathways by consuming grasses.
Threats:
Increased human presence for salt farming and agriculture and extensive cattle grazing pose a major threat to the delicate ecosystem and its wildlife.
Irrigation canals that bring water to the southern rim of the Little Rann can also add salinity to the soil.
Click to View More
Source :
Population of wild asses, an ‘endangered species’, has been rising since 1976 in Gujarat: State govt
Environment
**********Visit of President of Maldives to India – Key Takeaways
Why in news?
PM Modi and the visiting President of Maldives Mohamed Muizzu met on 7 October 2024. They comprehensively reviewed the entire gamut of bilateral ties while noting the progress made by both countries in deepening their historically close and special relationship.
What’s in today’s article?
Key outcomes of the bilateral meeting
Analysis of this visit
Vision Document released to transform the bilateral relationship
Both sides agreed to transform the bilateral relationship to a
Comprehensive Economic and Maritime Security Partnership
In this regard, a Vision Document was released which has detailed sections on various aspects of the bilateral relations between the two countries.
It is a blueprint for relations that has been charted out for the next several years and provides a framework for the ongoing visit.
The document also aims to bring together the objectives for India's own development as have been set out under the Viksit Bharat 2047 plan and
Maldives’ own action plan and objectives to become a developed country by 2040
Economic and Financial Support
India has extended financial support to Maldives,
offering INR 30 billion and USD 400 million through a bilateral currency swap agreement
This assistance aims to alleviate Maldives' financial struggles, as the country's foreign exchange reserves have dropped to dangerous levels.
The two sides have also initiated negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) to boost economic cooperation and Indian investments in various sectors of Maldives.
The two sides also agreed to settle trade transactions in local currencies.
Political Exchanges
Both countries agreed to intensify political exchanges, including among parliamentarians and local government representatives.
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will institutionalize cooperation between the two Parliaments.
Reviving Defence and Security Cooperation
India and Maldives agreed to bolster their defence and security cooperation, which had suffered after President Muizzu ordered Indian military personnel out of the country earlier this year.
India will
refit and repair a Maldivian Coast Guard vessel
, and both nations will collaborate on maritime security, disaster response, and defence capacity building.
Several initiatives have been launched to strengthen Maldives' maritime capabilities, including the provision of radar systems, defence platforms, and infrastructure support.
Defence and Maritime Security Initiatives
Both countries recognized the importance of collaboration in defence and maritime security, agreeing to:
Enhance Maldives' surveillance and monitoring capabilities.
Support the Maldives National Defence Force (MNDF) with equipment and infrastructure.
Strengthen disaster response, risk mitigation, and information-sharing capabilities.
Inaugurate the Maldivian Ministry of Defence building constructed with India's assistance.
Key Agreements Signed
Five pacts were signed during the meeting, including agreements on a bilateral currency swap, training of judicial officers, prevention of corruption, law enforcement training, and youth and sports cooperation.
Additionally, the two leaders inaugurated
700 social housing units and a new runway at the Hanimaadhoo International Airport was launched in the Maldives
launched the RuPay card in Maldives
, which will enhance ease of payments for Indian tourists visiting Maldives
Development cooperation
India and Maldives will collaborate on multiple infrastructure projects, including ports, airports, roads, and housing. Key projects include:
The timely completion of the Greater Malé Connectivity Project (GMCP).
Feasibility studies for island connections and a commercial port at Thilafushi.
Joint development of an Agriculture Economic Zone and fish processing facilities.
Digital Cooperation
India will assist Maldives in developing its digital and financial infrastructure, including launching services like UPI and RuPay for better e-governance and payment ease for tourists.
Health Cooperation
India will help in establishing Jan Aushadhi Kendras and enhancing emergency medical evacuation capacity.
Capacity Building and Training
India will continue to provide customized training for civil servants and launch a program for women-led development.
They also plan to establish a Start-up Incubator-Accelerator in the Maldives to support youth innovation.
Strengthened People-to-People Ties
The two nations also agreed to expand their people-to-people connections.
Plans were announced to
establish a consulate of Maldives in Bengaluru and a consulate of India in Addu City
Both countries acknowledged the strong ties formed through tourism, education, and healthcare, with India being a key source market for tourists visiting Maldives.
India will support the establishment of higher education institutions and skilling centers in Maldives.
An ICCR Chair will be established at Maldives National University to foster academic exchange.
Background: Strained Relations Between India and Maldives
Maldivian President's visit to India comes after a period of tension between the two countries.
Muizzu, who assumed office in November 2023, had campaigned on an ‘India Out’ platform, calling for the withdrawal of Indian military personnel from the Maldives.
This led to strained relations, as Muizzu was perceived to be closer to China, evident from his official visits to Turkey and China soon after taking office, bypassing India.
Traditionally, India had been the first destination for Maldivian presidents.
Relations worsened when Maldivian officials made derogatory comments about Indian PM Modi, which sparked a social media conflict between Maldivians and Indians.
The tensions earlier this year
affected tourism, with Indian tourist numbers to the Maldives dropping by 50,000, causing a loss of $150 million
India was the biggest source market for tourism to the Maldives in 2023, accounting for over 11% of the 1.8 million tourist arrivals.
Muizzu’s Shift in Stance
Muizzu’s softened approach toward India reflects his realization of the Maldives' domestic and economic challenges.
Despite his earlier rhetoric, Muizzu emphasized that the Maldives would not compromise India's security and stressed the importance of maintaining a balanced relationship with both India and other countries, including China.
Facing a looming economic crisis, including debt repayments and downgraded credit ratings by Moody’s, Muizzu’s visit is seen as an attempt to seek financial assistance from India.
Visit of President of Maldives to India – Key Takeaways.pdf
( Size:  3.6 MB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Vivo China siphoned off Rs 70,000 crore under garb of imports – ED
Why in news?
The Enforcement Directorate (ED) has filed a chargesheet against Vivo China, accusing the company of siphoning off Rs 70,000 crore from India under the guise of import payments.
What’s in today’s article?
Chinese Commercial Entities (CCE) and India’s internal security
Steps taken by Indian govt to address the issue
Background
A disturbing picture of Chinese Commercial Entities (CCE) has emerged after a series of actions by Indian authorities since 2020.
The investigation began after the June 15, 2020, incident in Ladakh’s Galwan.
Actions by Indian authorities included busting of spying rings, tax raids on major Chinese telecom companies, a crackdown on mobile apps and a study of incoming investments into India.
The actions by these agencies revealed a web of companies and individuals indulging in espionage, profiling of high value individuals, large-scale tax evasion and exfiltration of bulk data.
Findings of investigating agencies
The assessment by agencies found that the Chinese commercial entities operate in India with
five primary objectives
:
influencing minds; build economic control; acquisition of data; for espionage and to target scientists to compromise innovation and intellectual property rights (IPRs)
The objective of counterintelligence is pursued through top officials of Chinese companies in India.
Small-size shell companies were also used as financial conduits to fund espionage rings and resident agents.
Modus operandi of these entities
Hundreds of small companies controlled by Chinese nationals have
dummy Indian directors and managers for a show of legitimacy
Many of these companies did not physically exist at their registered offices. However, their banking accounts were active and being operated from abroad.
cheap (and sometimes below production cost) pricing model
that has given them control of a large chunk of the telecom and hardware markets in India.
Investigations also show that
some senior Chinese employees of these companies are documented members of the Chinese Communist Party
Hence, Beijing has a strong leverage on their operations in India.
Agencies also found a
seamless flow of data to Chinese servers
through remote access of modems, switches, routers and networks sold and installed by these companies in India.
Similarly, a seamless data link through Chinese origin mobile phones was also established during investigations.
The data collected has helped Chinese artificial intelligence (AI) engines create portraits, with biometric details of millions of Indians
Threat for India’s Internal Security
Access to personal data of Indians
Chinese entities have been storing away information and data using multiple methods, with the objective of
gaining strategic advantage over India’s economic and security systems
Influencing minds
Deep cover resident agents, posing as officials of these companies, are attempting to fund and influence masses in India.
This is being done to foment the sentiments of masses and create internal disturbances.
Such entities are also used to influence Tibetan monks living in India.
Chinese national Luo Sang, who was arrested for money laundering in August 2020, was actively sending money in packets to Tibetan monks.
Agencies are suspecting that it was intended to gather information about the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government in exile.
Espionage and money laundering
E.g., operating under the name of
Charlie Peng
, the web is believed to have laundered over Rs 1,000 crore, with some of the proceeds used to gather intelligence in India.
Recently, a top executive of a telecom company found in the possession of sensitive documents.
The investigation also revealed of exhaustive profiling of key business leaders.
Steps Taken By The Government
Crackdown by investigating agencies
Chinese commercial entities are under sustained investigation by the intelligence agencies since 2020.
Multiple raids have been conducted by the ED under the provision of Prevention of Money Laundering Act.
Clampdown on Chinese investment
In 2020, Central govt declared that foreign investments from countries with which India shares land border shall be under approval route.
Since China shares a land boundary with India, this announcement clamped down on investments from China making prior government clearance mandatory for all forms investments, even indirect ones.
Ban on Chinese app
The govt of India has banned more than 250 Chinese apps including PUBG Mobile, Tiktok, Shein, AliExpress and more.
Other steps
Intelligence Bureau created a new wing —
China Coordination Centre
— to collaborate with financial enforcement agencies to investigate Chinese companies.
57
Director General of Police conference
, held in January 2023, discussed the issue of influence wielded by Chinese commercial firms.
About the news
ED has filed a chargesheet against Vivo China, accusing the company of siphoning off Rs 70,000 crore from India under the guise of import payments.
Allegations made by ED
The ED claims that Vivo India remitted Rs 70,837 crore abroad since 2014, with
large sums being sent to overseas entities controlled by Vivo China
These entities, based in Hong Kong, Samoa, and the British Virgin Islands, were allegedly set up as trading companies to conceal their connection to Vivo China.
The ED also stated that
Vivo China tried to hide its relationship with Vivo India
, creating a structure that distanced itself on paper while maintaining control over the distribution network.
Special Purpose Vehicles, like Multi Accord Ltd in Hong Kong, were set up to exert control over Vivo India.
The chargesheet also alleges that Vivo India and its
state distributor companies mis-declared their ownership to the Indian government
Chinese nationals used Indian firms like Labquest Engineering Pvt Ltd and Lava International Ltd to carry out unauthorized business activities and obtain invitations to India without raising suspicion.
Vivo China siphoned off Rs 70,000 crore under garb of imports – ED.pdf
( Size:  1.7 MB  )
Click to View More
Defence & Security
**********What are microRNAs?
Why in News?
The 2024 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to American biologists Victor Ambros and Gary Ruvkun by the Nobel Assembly at Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden.
The scientists won the esteemed prize for the
discovery of microRNA
and its role in post-transcriptional gene regulation.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background:
Gene expression in cells and tissues
of every complex organism is precisely controlled and largely dependent on different conditions (such as development, changes in the environment, diseases or drugs).
Various cells and organ systems within such organisms (including humans) contain different
gene expression profiles.
Thus,
proper understanding
of regulatory mechanisms involved in such expression represents one of the
key issues in genomic medicine
Non-coding RNA (ncRNAs):
These molecules have
a role in a plethora of regulatory events
- from controlling the number of copies in bacterial division to X-chromosome inactivation in mammals.
Recent genomic scans of humans and animals have revealed that the majority of RNA transcripts are
rather than messenger RNAs (mRNAs), which code for proteins.
About miRNAs:
MicroRNAs/ miRNAs are small, non-coding molecules of RNA, which plays an important role in determining how much mRNA, which carries genetic information, eventually gets translated into protein.
Significance of miRNA:
The body makes proteins in a complex process with two broad steps.
In the transcription step
, a cell copies a DNA sequence into mRNA in the nucleus. The mRNA moves from the nucleus, through the cell fluid, and attaches itself to the ribosome.
In the translation step
, another type of RNA called transfer RNA (tRNA) brings specific amino acids to the ribosome, where they are linked together in the order specified by the mRNA to make the protein.
regulates
the production of proteins by bonding with and subsequently silencing the mRNA at an appropriate juncture. The process is called
Discovery of miRNAs:
miRNA was initially discovered in a tiny roundworm (C. elegans) by Victor Ambros' laboratory in 1993 while studying the gene lin-14. At the same time, Gary Ravkun identified the first miRNA target gene.
These two groundbreaking discoveries identified a novel mechanism of posttranscriptional gene regulation.
2024 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine:
Why were scientists honoured?
The scientists were honoured for their discovery of a fundamental principle governing
how gene activity is regulated
Gene regulation is a process
that helps each cell pick the right tools for its specific tasks.
Their research led them to the discovery of microRNA
, which provided a whole new way of understanding how bodies of complex organisms such as humans function.
Understanding the role of miRNA:
Genetic information is stored in DNA inside the nucleus of each cell.
This information is copied to mRNA, which carries the instructions for protein synthesis.
Different tissues in the body create specific proteins based on their functions, such as making muscles contract and helping nerves communicate.
Cells differentiate and perform their tasks through gene regulation, which turns specific genes on or off.
Errors in gene regulation
can lead to
serious diseases,
including cancer, diabetes, autoimmune conditions, etc.
Hence, understanding gene regulation is
essential for understanding and potentially treating these diseases.
A single micro-RNA
can regulate the expression of many genes
, and alternatively a single gene can also be controlled by multiple micro-RNAs.
This leads to fine tuning of different types of cells despite similar genetic information.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  925.3 KB  )
Click to View More
Science & Tech
**********India’s Model Bilateral Investment Treaty
Why in the News?
India has eased certain conditions for UAE in the bilateral investment treaty. The India-UAE Bilateral Investment Treaty came into force on August 31 this year.
What’s in Today’s Article?
About BIT
India’s Model BIT (Objective, Features, Benefits, Challenges, etc.)
News Summary
About Bilateral Investment Treaty:
A Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) is an agreement between two countries that establishes the terms and conditions for private investments by nationals and companies of one country in the other country.
BITs are aimed at promoting and protecting investments, ensuring a stable legal environment for investors from both countries.
India’s Model Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT):
India’s Model Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT), introduced in 2016, is a framework designed to guide India’s negotiations of investment treaties with other countries.
The objective of this Model BIT is
to strike a balance between investor protection and sovereign rights of the host state to regulate in public interest
The introduction of the Model BIT came after several disputes arose under India’s earlier BITs, prompting the country to revise its investment treaty policy to safeguard both investor interests and India's regulatory autonomy.
Key Features:
Protection of Investor Rights:
The Model BIT ensures
fair and equitable treatment (FET)
of foreign investors but limits its scope.
Unlike traditional BITs, where FET is broadly interpreted, the Indian Model BIT provides a narrow definition, making it harder for investors to claim arbitrary treatment.
National Treatment and Most-Favoured-Nation (MFN) Clauses:
guarantees foreign investors the same treatment as domestic investors.
However, the
MFN clause
has been excluded from India’s Model BIT to prevent foreign investors from using provisions from other treaties to gain favourable treatment.
Non-Expropriation:
The Model BIT assures that
expropriation
(when the state takes private property for public use) will be carried out only for a public purpose and with due process.
It ensures that investors will be compensated fairly for expropriation, but it provides strong provisions to protect the state’s right to regulate for public interest, such as health, environment, and social welfare.
Right to Regulate:
One of the most notable changes in India’s Model BIT is the explicit
in areas like public health, environmental protection, and safety.
The Model BIT emphasizes that state actions taken to protect public interest should not be considered a breach of the treaty.
Investor Obligations:
India’s Model BIT introduces the concept of
investor obligations
, which means that foreign investors must comply with the host country’s laws and regulations, including environmental and social standards.
Exclusions in India’s Model BIT:
No Protection for Tax-Related Issues:
One of the significant exclusions is the lack of protection for
taxation matters
India’s Model BIT explicitly states that taxation measures will not be subject to ISDS.
No Most-Favoured-Nation Clause:
is absent in the Model BIT to avoid treaty-shopping by foreign investors (using favourable clauses from another treaty to their advantage).
Benefits of Model BIT:
Balanced Approach
It strikes a balance between
and the
in public interest, ensuring that India can pursue policy objectives without fear of excessive litigation.
The inclusion of investor obligations, such as compliance with local laws and regulations, ensures accountability and promotes responsible investment.
Limiting Arbitrary Claims
By narrowing the scope of
Fair and Equitable Treatment
and removing the
clause, the Model BIT reduces the likelihood of investors exploiting treaty provisions for arbitration.
Local Remedies Requirement
Requiring investors to exhaust local remedies before initiating
Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS)
promotes the use of domestic legal systems, easing the burden of international arbitration.
Challenges of Model BIT:
Investor Reluctance
Stricter conditions, such as the
local remedies clause
and limited ISDS scope, may deter foreign investors from investing in India, fearing lengthy legal processes or inadequate protection.
Absence of MFN Clause
The exclusion of the
could put Indian BITs at a disadvantage compared to treaties of other countries, reducing the attractiveness of India as an investment destination.
Complex Dispute Resolution
The requirement to resolve disputes through domestic courts first might lead to
delays
in settling disputes, making investors wary of India’s dispute resolution framework.
Exclusion of Taxation Matters
By excluding
tax-related disputes
from arbitration, the Model BIT leaves investors vulnerable to unexpected tax policy changes without recourse to international arbitration.
News Summary:
India-UAE Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT)
, which came into effect on
August 31, 2024
, reflects changes aimed at making the treaty more
investor-friendly
According to the
Global Trade Research Initiative (GTRI)
, two key changes stand out:
Reduction in Local Remedies Period
The period that investors must attempt to resolve disputes through India's legal system has been reduced from five years to three years.
This change provides investors with quicker access to
While it attracts investors by speeding up dispute resolution, it also
weakens India's ability
to handle disputes domestically, increasing the chances of costly international arbitration.
Inclusion of Portfolio Investments
Unlike India's
, which excludes
portfolio investments
(such as stocks and bonds), the India-UAE BIT includes them as protected investments.
This broadens the treaty's scope and increases India's exposure to disputes over financial instruments, moving away from the Model BIT’s focus on long-term, direct investments.
Overall, the treaty signals a shift towards a more open investment environment, but at the cost of some
regulatory sovereignty
While it may encourage more investment from the UAE, it also raises the risk of higher arbitration claims.
UAE is currently the seventh-largest investor in India
, with about
$19 billion
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
from April 2000 to June 2024.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  155.9 KB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********A re-balancing of India’s great power relations
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
India’s relation with major powers in the world;
Why in the News?
India’s participation in the
sixth Quad Leaders’ Summit in Wilmington
, Delaware, U.S
., on September 21, 2024, has heightened expectations for strengthening security cooperation among the “four key maritime democracies in the Indo-Pacific.”
How can India navigate its relationships with major powers?
Strategic Autonomy
: India maintains a policy of non-alignment, balancing relations with both the
U.S. and Russia.
It is careful not to be drawn into formal alliances but seeks to leverage its partnerships for national interests.
Quad vs. Russia
: India’s engagement with the U.S.-led Quad strengthens its
Indo-Pacific strategy
, while its ties with Russia (a Quad opponent) focus on maintaining historical
military and strategic benefits
Russia-China Dynamics
: As Russia moves closer to China, India seeks to rebalance, ensuring its interests are not sidelined, particularly in the context of China’s growing influence in Asia and unresolved border disputes.
U.S. Partnership
: While deepening ties with the U.S., India is cautious about fully aligning with
Washington’s agenda
(for exports)
, especially regarding tensions with Russia.
What role does India play in Global Conflict Resolution?
As a Peace facilitator
: India is increasingly positioning itself as a peace facilitator, evidenced by the NSA (
Ajit Dowal
) of India’s outreach to Russia and France regarding the Ukraine conflict and peace plan.
As a ‘Vishwa Bandhu’
: India’s engagement with both Ukraine and Russia shows its willingness to serve as an interlocutor, navigating complex diplomatic terrains while pushing for dialogue in global conflicts.
India’s attempts to mediate in conflicts like Ukraine emphasize its independent foreign policy, aiming to project itself as a
“Vishwa Bandhu”
(friend to the world).
What implications do Domestic Issues have on India’s Foreign Policy?
Economic Dependencies
: India’s reliance on Russian military equipment and discounted oil affects its stance on the Ukraine war, pushing for a more nuanced approach in balancing U.S. and Russian relations.
Border Tensions with China
: Domestic security concerns, such as the
standoff at the LAC
, influence India’s foreign policy decisions, especially in its cautious relationship with China despite economic interdependence.
Public Opinion and Strategic Decisions
: India’s foreign policy must account for domestic perceptions of global powers, balancing national security with economic growth and political stability in a complex international environment.
Way forward:
Strengthen Strategic Autonomy
: India should continue balancing its relationships with major powers by deepening economic and security ties with both the U.S. and Russia, while maintaining flexibility to protect its national interests, particularly in the Indo-Pacific and vis-à-vis China.
Expand Peace Diplomacy
: India can further leverage its role as a mediator in global conflicts, enhancing its international standing by promoting dialogue and peace initiatives.
**********How high-performance buildings are the next step towards a sustainable future?
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Sustainable Development;
Mains level:
Issues associated with Urbanization; Sustainable development; High-performance building;
Why in the News?
Due to rapid urbanization, India is facing the challenge of exceeding global energy efficiency and carbon benchmarks. High-performance buildings (HPBs) offer resilient, adaptive, and self-sufficient designs, promoting healthier indoor environments and better air quality.
What are High-Performance Buildings (HPBs)?
These are structures designed to achieve
peak levels of energy efficiency,
sustainability, and occupant comfort.
They go beyond standard building practices by integrating advanced technologies and smart design strategies to minimize environmental impact, optimize resource use, and improve overall performance.
For example,
Unnati (Greater Noida)
Indira Paryavaran Bhawan (New Delhi)
showcase smart designs like sun-optimized facades and advanced HVAC systems, reducing energy use.
Key features of HPBs include:
Energy Efficiency
: HPBs use cutting-edge technologies like energy-efficient HVAC systems, smart lighting controls, and advanced insulation to reduce energy consumption.
Water Conservation
: Techniques like greywater recycling and rainwater harvesting help HPBs minimize water usage.
Sustainable Materials
: HPBs use eco-friendly, durable materials to reduce their carbon footprint and increase building longevity.
Site-Specific Design
: HPBs leverage natural lighting, ventilation, and terrain-specific water management to enhance thermal efficiency and reduce energy demand.
Building Management Systems (BMS)
: HPBs employ BMS to monitor real-time performance metrics such as energy usage, water consumption, and indoor air quality, ensuring continuous optimization of resources.
How can HPBs help Indian cities?
Resource Efficiency
: HPBs help reduce energy consumption and promote water conservation, addressing India’s resource scarcity and fluctuating energy markets.
Urban Resilience
: By being energy-efficient and self-sufficient, HPBs can help cities adapt to rising temperatures and urbanization pressures.
Healthier Environments
: HPBs enhance indoor air quality, thermal comfort, and occupant well-being through intelligent systems like air filtration, natural lighting, and smart temperature control.
The strain on Infrastructure
: HPBs can relieve pressure on public infrastructure by minimizing resource usage, making them crucial for fast-growing cities.
Sustainable Growth
: HPBs are key to driving India’s transition to a low-carbon economy, supporting sustainable urbanization, and enhancing property value through long-term cost savings.
Way Forward:
Scaling Adoption of HPBs
: Promote widespread implementation of HPBs through government incentives, regulations, and public-private partnerships, aligning with
SDG Goal 11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities)
to foster inclusive, safe, and resilient urban spaces.
Innovation and Capacity Building
: Encourage innovation in building technologies and workforce training to develop HPBs, contributing to
SDG Goal 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy)
by ensuring energy efficiency and reducing carbon emissions in cities.
**********On the need for a different framework for passive Mutual Funds
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Passive mutual fund;
Mains level:
Liberalisation of mutual funds;
Why in the News?
On September 30, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) launched the liberalized Mutual Funds Lite (MF Lite) framework specifically for passively managed schemes.
What is a Passive Mutual Fund?
A
is a type of investment fund that follows a market index, like Nifty50, trying to match its performance.
They can be easily tracked, whereas,
Active Mutual Funds
need expert fund managers to actively monitor them and make investments in securities of their choice accordingly.
Since there’s no need for constant research, analysis, or active trading the
costs are lower.
Key highlights of the liberalized Mutual Funds Lite (MF Lite) framework:
Separate Framework for Passive Funds
: It is tailored for passively managed schemes, which are less risky and require minimal active management.
Relaxed Entry Requirements
: Lowered net worth requirement (₹35 crore), simplified criteria for sponsor eligibility (profitability, track record).
Encouraging New Players
: It provides easier entry for new
AMCs (
Asset management companies)
and market players in the passive fund segment.
Governance Flexibility
: It has reduced oversight for trustees; operational responsibilities shifted to AMC boards, focusing on fees, expenses, and tracking error.
Cost Efficiency Focus
: It emphasizes on lowering
Total Expense Ratio (TER)
and minimizing tracking error for better returns.
Simplified Disclosures
: The
Scheme Information Documents (SID) are
simplified to focus on key metrics like benchmark index, TER, and tracking error.
Risk Management
: Audit committees of AMCs can handle risk management duties due to the lower risk profile of passive funds.
Why a Separate Framework for MF Lite is Needed?
Lower Risk Profile
: Passively managed funds are generally less risky because they track established benchmarks like
BSE Sensex or Nifty50
, reducing the need for active decision-making.
Minimal Asset Manager Discretion
: Unlike actively managed funds, asset managers of passive funds have
limited discretion
in asset allocation and investment objectives. They simply mirror the performance of the benchmark index.
Inapplicability of Existing Regulations
: The current framework is designed primarily for actively managed funds, which involve more risks and require more oversight. It is less suitable for passive funds, which operate with predefined, transparent rules.
Cost-Effective Market Entry
: To encourage new players and make the passive fund industry more competitive, SEBI introduced
relaxed regulations
regarding eligibility, net worth, and profitability.
What about risks and disclosures?
Success depends on
Lower costs and minimal deviation from the benchmark are crucial for performance.
Scheme Information Documents (SID) focus on key metrics like the
benchmark name
, TER, and tracking error, leaving out complex strategies.
Risk management responsibilities are streamlined, allowing the audit committee of the AMC to handle oversight, reflecting the lower risks of passive funds.
Way forward:
Enhance Investor Education
: Develop targeted educational initiatives to inform retail investors about the benefits, risks, and operational aspects of passive mutual funds, fostering informed investment decisions.
Ongoing Regulatory Evaluation
: Establish a framework for periodic assessment and adaptation of the MF Lite regulations to ensure they remain effective and relevant, promoting competition while safeguarding investor interests.
**********Farmers to receive aid under Rythu Bharosa
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Rythu Bharosa Scheme
Why in the News?
After the completion of the loan waiver, the Telangana government will provide Rythu Bharosa assistance to support farmers further.
About the
Rythu Bharosa Scheme:
Details
Scheme Name
Rythu Bharosa Scheme (Farmer’s Investment Support Scheme – FISS)
Launch Year
2018-19 Kharif season (Telangana Govt’s Navratna Scheme)
Objective
To support the initial investment needs of farmers by providing financial aid for agriculture and horticulture crops.
Benefits
₹5,000 per acre per season as a grant for input purchases, with no cap on the number of acres owned by farmers.
Eligibility
Farmers must be residents of Telangana.
Must own agricultural land.
Small and marginal farmers are eligible.
Farmers cultivating land with Record of Forest Rights (ROFR) document (mainly from Scheduled Tribe communities).
Ineligible Farmers
Commercial farmers.
Farmers working on a rental contract or tenant farmers.
Significance of the move
Financial Relief for Farmers
: By waiving loans of up to ₹2 lakh per farmer, the scheme provides significant financial relief, helping farmers manage their debt and invest in future agricultural activities.
Boost to Agricultural Sector
: The waiver will enable farmers to focus on improving productivity and crop yields without the burden of debt, potentially boosting the state’s agricultural output.
Reduction in Farmer Distress
: This move will alleviate distress among farmers, especially those affected by unpredictable weather and fluctuating crop prices, reducing the risk of farm-related suicides and financial instability.
PYQ:
[2020]
Under the Kisan Credit Card scheme, short-term credit support is given to farmers for which of the following purposes?
Working capital for maintenance of farm assets
Purchase of combine harvesters, tractors and mini trucks
Consumption requirements of farm households
Post-harvest expenses
Construction of family house and setting up of village cold storage facility
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1, 2 and 5 only
(b) 1, 3 and 4 only
(c) 2, 3, 4 and 5 only
(d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
**********CERC steps in to tackle sudden Surges in Power Demand
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC)
Why in the News?
India’s power regulator, the
, has appointed a Single Member Bench to assess the challenges of a sudden surge in power demand.
Projected Power Demand for October 2024
projected peak power demand
230 Gigawatts (GW)
After factoring in
Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) losses
, the demand is expected to rise to
232.2 GW
To meet this demand, an additional
12.60 GW
generation resources
is required.
Concerns over Power System Operation:
The steep rise in electricity demand, without enough generation sources, could pose a
risk to power system operations
Regional Load Despatch Centres (RLDCs)
State Load Despatch Centres (SLDCs)
are responsible for conducting
operational planning
to manage this surge, especially due to
seasonal variations
About
Details
Establishment
It was constituted on July 24, 1998, under the
Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998
, and later brought under the
Electricity Act, 2003
Type
Statutory body
quasi-judicial status
under Section 76 of the Electricity Act, 2003.
Ministry
Functions under the
Ministry of Power, Government of India
Primary Functions
– Regulates tariffs of power generation companies (owned/controlled by the Government of India).
– Regulates interstate transmission tariffs.
– Issues licenses for interstate transmission and trading.
Key Role in Tariff Evolution
– Introduced a
Two-Part Tariff
in 1992.
Availability Based Tariff (ABT)
in 2000 to improve grid stability.
Advisory Role
– Contributes to
National Electricity Policy
Tariff Policy
– Promotes competition, efficiency, and investment in the electricity sector.
Licensing
– Issues licenses for electricity transmission and interstate trading.
Grid Operation Standards
Enforces standards under the
Indian Electricity Grid Code (IEGC)
to improve grid stability and power quality.
Dispute Resolution
Adjudicates disputes involving power generation companies and transmission licensees.
Collaboration
Signed a
MoU with the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)
in 2009 for enhancing power market regulation and grid reliability.
First Chairman
Mr. S.L. Rao (1998–2001).
PYQ:
[2016]
Which one of the following is the purpose of ‘UDAY’, a scheme of the Government?
(a) Providing technical and financial assistance to start-up entrepreneurs in the field of renewable sources of energy
(b) Providing electricity to every household in the country by 2018
(c) Replacing the coal-based power plants with natural gas, nuclear, solar, wind and tidal power plants over a period of time
(d) Providing for financial turnaround and revival of power distribution companies
**********India slipped on the Academic Freedom Index (AFI)
Indian Society
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
India has seen a sharp decline in Academic Freedom Index rankings over the past 10 years.
About the
Details
Released by
Global Public Policy Institute (GPPi)
in collaboration with Scholars at Risk (SAR) and V-Dem Institute (Varieties of Democracy)
Published as a part of a
global
time-series dataset
1900-2019
Purpose
To assess and quantify academic freedom across different countries
Score Range
0 (complete repression) to 1 (full academic freedom)
Scores based on expert surveys and institutional data
Main Parameters
Freedom to Research and Teach
Institutional Autonomy
Freedom of Academic Exchange and Dissemination
Campus Integrity
Freedom of Expression for Academics
Constitutional Protection of Academic Freedom
Usage
Tracking academic freedom trends
Influencing policy
Advocating for academic liberty in different countries
Annual Report
Published as part of the “Free to Think” report series by Scholars at Risk
India’s Performance:
academic freedom score
dropped from
0.6 points
2013
to just
0.2 points
2023
, marking a significant deterioration.
The report categorizes India as
“completely restricted”
, the country’s lowest rank since the
mid-1940s
This decline is attributed to many factors, including:
Political Influence on Universities
Limitations on Student Protests
Significance
Impact on Democracy:
The decline threatens democratic values, as universities, traditionally spaces for free thought and dissent, and are increasingly under political control, limiting student protests and academic expression.
International Reputation:
India’s shrinking academic freedom could harm its global standing, making it less attractive to international students, scholars, and research collaborations.
Long-Term Effects on Education:
The politicization of higher education may weaken innovation and critical thinking, hindering economic growth and the development of future leaders and policymakers.
**********India signs $750-mn currency swap deal with forex-starved Maldives
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
SAARC Currency Swap Framework
Why in the News?
The
RBI
has announced a
Currency Swap Agreement
with the Maldives Monetary Authority (MMA) under the
SAARC Currency Swap Framework 2024-27
.
India’s Financial Support to Maldives
India will extend financial support to the Maldives, providing
$400 million
US Dollar/Euro Swap Window
Additionally,
₹30 billion (approximately $357 million)
will be made available under the
INR Swap Window
The Currency Swap Agreement will remain valid until
June 18, 2027
About SAARC Currency Swap Framework
Details
Objective
To provide short-term liquidity support to SAARC member countries during financial crises or instability.
Administered by
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
Launch Year
2012
Countries Involved
All SAARC members:
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
Facility
Swap arrangement in
US Dollar, Euro
, or I
ndian Rupee
Interest Rate
Based on the currency borrowed, includes a margin over international benchmark rates.
Purpose
To address the
balance of payment crises
and provide
financial stability
Recent Users
Sri Lanka, Maldives
Maldives’ Debt Situation
The Maldives’ debt is now estimated at
110% of its gross domestic product (GDP)
, with increasing risks of
defaulting
on its
sukuk
(Islamic bond).
A failure to make payments would mark the
world’s first default of an Islamic bond
Fitch Ratings
estimates that the Maldives’ external debt obligations will reach
$557 million
2025
and exceed
$1 billion
2026
The country’s
foreign reserves
stood at just
$437 million
at the end of August, only enough to cover
one-and-a-half months of imports
India provided a
$50 million lifeline
to the Maldives to help avoid this outcome.
Export-Import Bank of India
is owed nearly
, while the
Export-Import Bank of China
is owed about
$530 million
as of last year.
Significance of India’s Assistance
Debt Relief
: India’s financial aid, including a $50 million lifeline, would help the Maldives avoid debt default and stabilize its economy.
Geopolitical Influence
: With this, India can counter China’s influence in the Maldives, strengthening its strategic position in the Indian Ocean.
Diplomatic Reset
: India’s support strengthens diplomatic relations, aiding the Maldives in debt restructuring and global partnerships.
PYQ:
[2019]
In the context of India, which of the following factors is/are contributor/contributors to reducing the risk of a currency crisis?
The foreign currency earnings of India’s IT sector
Increasing the government expenditure
Remittances from Indians abroad
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 only
(b) 1 and 3 only
(c) 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
**********