Amchang Wildlife Sanctuary
Recently, a highly decomposed carcass of an elephant was discovered in the Khanapara range of the Amchang Wildlife Sanctuary.
About
Amchang Wildlife Sanctuary:
It is located in the
state of Assam
It comprises three Reserve forests-Khanapara, Amchang, and South Amchang.
It stretches from the
Brahmaputra River
in the north to the hilly forests of
Meghalaya in the south,
forming a continuous forest belt through Meghalaya's Maradakdola Reserve Forests.
Flora:
Khasi Hill Sal Forests,
East Himalayan Mixed Deciduous Forest
, Eastern Alluvial Secondary Semi-evergreen Forests and East Himalayan Sal Forests.
Fauna:
Flying fox, Slow loris, Assamese macaque, Rhesus macaque, Hoolock gibbon, Porcupine. White-backed Vulture, Slender-billed Vulture.
Tree yellow butterflies (gancana harina) are found at the Amchang Wildlife Sanctuary which is Indigenous to Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and northeast India.
Click to View More
Source :
Forest dept under scrutiny after elephant carcass found in Amchang Wildlife Sanctuary
Environment
**********Lightning
Climate change is making lightning strikes around the world more common and deadlier.
About
Lightning:
It strikes are possible because
electrical charges can build up in a cloud
beyond the ability of air to keep resisting their movement.
It is an electrical discharge between charged particles in a cloud and the ground.
It can occur between
opposite charges within the thunderstorm cloud
(intra-cloud lightning) or
between opposite charges in the cloud
and on the ground (cloud-to-ground lightning).
It is one of the oldest observed natural phenomena on Earth. It can be seen in volcanic eruptions, extremely intense forest fires, surface nuclear detonations, heavy snowstorms, large hurricanes, and obviously, thunderstorms.
While a lightning strike occurs between a cloud and an object on or near the ground, it
takes the path of least resistance
, which means it moves towards the closest object with the highest electric potential.
What is a lightning rod?
metallic rod
(usually copper) that protects a structure from lightning damage by
intercepting flashes and guiding their currents into the ground.
Lightning rods are pointy and pointed things create stronger electric fields near them.
The lightning rod is connected to a wire that drops through the length of the building into the ground, where it dissipates its electric charges into its surroundings
Click to View More
Source :
How do lightning rods prevent lightning strikes from reaching people?
Environment
**********Hokersar Wetland
Lack of water due to excess deficit rainfall at the Hokersar wetland in the Kashmir Valley in recent years has impacted the arrival of migratory bird populations in the region.
About
Hokersar Wetland:
It is known as the ‘
Queen Wetland of Kashmir’,
Hokersar (also known as Hokera) is a designated Ramsar site located in
Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir.
It is a natural perennial wetland contiguous to the
Jhelum basin.
It gets water from the
Doodhganga River
(Tributary of Jhelum).
It is located in the northwest Himalayan biogeographic province of
, back of the snow-draped Pir Panchal.
Fauna:
It is the only site with remaining
reedbeds of Kashmir
and a pathway of 68 waterfowl species like Large Egret, Great Crested Grebe, Little Cormorant, Common Shelduck, Tufted Duck and endangered White-eyed Pochard,
It is an important source of food, spawning ground and nursery for fishes, besides offering feeding and breeding ground to a variety of water birds.
What is the Ramsar Convention?
This convention was signed on
2nd February 1971
to preserve the ecological character of their wetlands of international importance.
It is named after Ramsar, the Iranian city where the treaty was signed in 1971, and places chosen for conservation under it are given the tag
‘Ramsar site’.
Click to View More
Source :
Lack of rainfall impacts arrival of migratory birds in Kashmir Valley’s Hokersar wetland
Environment
**********Key Facts about Sutlej River
Anger mounts in Sri Ganganagar district, Rajasthan, against alleged pollution in the river Sutlej, which they blame on factories in the neighbouring Punjab.
About Sutlej River:
It is the longest of the
five tributaries of the Indus River.
It is also known as
"Satadree".
The Sutlej River is primarily located to the
north of the Vindhya Range
east of the
Pakistani Central Makran Range,
and
south of the Hindu Kush region.
Course
Origin
: It rises on the north slope of the Himalayas in
Lake Rakshastal in southwestern Tibet
at an elevation above 15,000 feet (4,600 metres).
It is one of
only three Trans Himalayan rivers
originating in the
high Tibetan Plateau
that cuts across the mighty Himalayan ranges. The other two are the Indus and the Brahmaputra.
The Sutlejenters India by flowing west and south-westwards through the
Shipki La Pass in Himachal Pradesh
at an altitude of 6,608 metres.
The river
then flows through Punjab
near Nangal before meeting
the Beas River.
The merger of these two rivers goes on to form 105 Km of the
India-Pakistan border.
The river continues to flow for another 350 Km before
joining the Chenab River.
The combination of the
Sutlej and Chenab Rivers forms the Panjnad
finally flows into the Indus River.
Length
: It has a total length of
1550 km, out
of which
529 km is in Pakistan.
hydrology
of the Sutlej is
controlled by spring and summer snowmelt
in the Himalayas and by the
South Asian monsoon
Tributaries
: It has many tributaries, with
Baspa, Spiti, Nogli Khad,
Soan River
being its main ones.
Water from the Sutlej River has been allocated to India according to the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960.
There are several major hydroelectric projects on the Sutlej, including the 1,000 MW Bhakra Dam, the 1,000 MW
Karcham Wangtoo Hydroelectric Plant
, and the 1,530 MW
Nathpa Jhakri Dam.
Click to View More
Source :
Anger mounts in Rajasthan district over pollution in river Sutlej, local leaders say Punjab’s industries to blame
Geography
**********What is Arrow-3 Missile Defence System?
Israel's Defence Ministry has begun coordinating joint preparations with the German Federal Ministry of Defence for the initial deployment of Israel's Arrow-3 missile interception system on German soil in 2025.
About Arrow-3 Missile Defence System:
It is
an exo-atmospheric anti-ballistic missile defence system
for long-range threat engagement.
The Arrow 3 interceptor is part of a series of the
Arrow Weapon System
(AWS), the
world’s first national,
operational, and
stand-alone Anti Tactical Ballistic Missiles (ATBM) defense system.
It was jointly developed by
Israel Aerospace Industries and the Missile Defence Agency in the US.
Initially deployed in 2017, Arrow-3 is the
top layer of Israel's
sophisticated
air-defence network,
which also includes the Arrow 2, David’s Sling, and the Iron Dome active defence systems.
It is designed to
take out ballistic missiles
while they are still outside of the atmosphere.
Features:
It uses
two-stage solid-fueled
interceptors
to engage short- and medium-range ballistic missiles and consists of a launcher, radar, and battle management system.
hypersonic
, which travels five times the speed of sound.
It provides a
range of 2,400
km
and can intercept threats at an altitude of 100
It has
early warning and fire control radar
. It provides extended-range acquisition as well as
multi-target acquisition and tracking capabilities.
How does it work?
It uses
hit-to-kill technology
to destroy incoming missiles.
The missile is launched vertically, and then the direction is changed towards the estimated interception point.
high-resolution electro-optical sensor
acquires the target for the kill vehicle to hit the target and destroy the warhead.
Click to View More
Source :
Israel moves forward on deploying Arrow-3 missile defence system in Germany in 2025
Science & Tech
**********What is Eurasian Otter?
A rescue operation conducted by the Pune Forest Department and RESQ Charitable Trust has revealed a rare Eurasian Otter in Indapur, Pune District, a species previously unrecorded in this area.
About Eurasian Otter:
The Eurasian otter, also known as the
European otter
, Eurasian River otter,
common otter,
Old-World otter
, is a
semiaquatic carnivorous mammal
native to Eurasia.
Scientific Name: Lutra lutra
Distribution
It has one of the
widest distributions of all palearctic mammals,
spanning countries in the
Middle East, Europe
, and Northern
Africa
, across to Eastern
Russia, China,
and other
Asian countries
In India, it occurs in
northern, northeast and southern India
Habitat
It lives in a wide variety of
aquatic habitats
, including highland and lowland lakes, rivers, streams, marshes, swamp forests, and coastal areas, independent of their size, origin, or latitude.
In the Indian subcontinent, it is found in
cold hills and mountain streams.
Features:
It is an
elusive, solitary otter.
It has sleek brown fur, which is often paler on the underside, and a long, lithe body with a thick tail and short legs.
Adaptations for an aquatic lifestyle include
webbed feet,
the ability to close the small ears and the nose when underwater, and very dense, short fur that traps a layer of air to insulate the animal.
Many sensitive hairs ('vibrissae') frame the snout; these help the otter to locate prey.
It has an
acute sense of sight, smell, and hearing
Vocalizations include a
high-pitched whistle
between a mother and her cubs, twittering noises produced during play-fighting, and cat-like noises when fighting.
Conservation Status:
IUCN: Near threatened
Wildlife Protection Act, 1972:
Schedule II
CITES:
Appendix I
Click to View More
Source :
Rare Eurasian Otter discovered in Pune District for the first time during rescue mission
Environment
**********Key Facts about Toto Tribe
Totos, one of the smallest tribes in the world, are fighting for identity and suffering from infrastructure woes.
About Toto Tribe:
Toto is an
aboriginal Indo-Bhutanese tribe
concentrated in the
village of Totopara
in the Alipurduar district of
West Bengal.
The Totopara village falls under the
periphery of the Jaldapara Wildlife Sanctuary
It nestles just to the south of the
border between Bhutan and West Bengal
, on the
bank of the Torsa River
Anthropologically, the Toto tribe is a branch of the
Tibetan-Mongoloid ethnic group
They are one of the
most endangered tribes
in the world, with
just over 1,600 members
The Toto tribe is often
described as ‘a vanishing tribe’
verge of extinction.
They are categorised as a
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group
(PVTG).
Toto Language:
It is a
Sino-Tibetan language
spoken by the Toto people and is
written in the Bengali script.
Totos are endogamous and are divided into 13 exogamous clans, from which, they choose to marry.
Unique to their culture is the idea of having
only a single wife,
and they
strongly advocate an anti-dowry system,
unlike neighbouring tribal practices.
Their houses are elevated bamboo huts covered by thatched roofs.
Beliefs
: Toto people
consider themselves Hindus who also worship nature.
Economy
In the past,
Totos were
mainly food gatherers and practiced slashes and burn types, of cultivation
Along with this, the Toto families earn a good amount of money by working as porters carrying oranges from the different gardens of Bhutan to Totopara.
With the passage of time
, occupational diversification has taken place. At present, they
have become settled agriculturists
Click to View More
Source :
Totos, a primitive tribe near India-Bhutan border, are fighting for survival
Geography
**********Consumption of kodo millet led to the death of 10 elephants in MP
Why in news?
Ten elephants from a herd of thirteen have tragically died in Madhya Pradesh’s Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve over the past three days.
Forest officials suspect the deaths were caused by “mycotoxins associated with
,” also known as
'Varagu,
' a grain that can be toxic under specific conditions.
What’s in today’s article?
Kodo millet
Why do kodo millets become poisonous?
Mitigation Strategies for Kodo Millet Poisoning
Origin, Cultivation, and Nutritional Value
Kodo millet, also known as Kodra or Varagu, is believed to have originated in India.
It is widely grown in regions such as India, Pakistan, and West Africa.
In India, Madhya Pradesh is a leading producer, with the
crop thriving in arid, tropical, and subtropical regions on poor soils
Apart from MP, the millet is cultivated in Gujarat, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, and parts of Tamil Nadu.
It is a staple food for tribal and economically disadvantaged communities due to its drought tolerance, high yield, and nutrient-rich profile, including vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and dietary fiber.
Health Benefits and Culinary Uses of Kodo Millet
Kodo millet is gluten-free, easy to digest, and may have anti-carcinogenic properties.
It is used to make traditional dishes like idli, dosa, porridge, rotis, and more.
Its dietary fiber supports digestive health, glucose absorption, and cholesterol management.
Historical Cases of Kodo Millet Poisoning
The earliest recorded kodo millet poisoning case dates to 1922, involving human poisoning documented by Dr. Anand Swarup.
In the same year, a case of animal poisoning in a dog was also reported.
In 1983, a study noted the first documented case of elephant deaths from consuming kodo millet.
Research in 1985 identified the
mycotoxin cyclopiazonic acid (CPA) in kodo millet as a cause of “kodua poisoning.
Cyclopiazonic Acid Toxicity and Fungal Risks in Kodo Millet Cultivation
A 2023 research paper highlights that kodo millet, primarily cultivated in dry and semi-arid regions, is vulnerable to certain environmental conditions that can lead to increased crop loss and risk of poisoning.
During spring and summer,
millets become more susceptible to fungal infections
, especially from
ergot fungi
, which can grow in the ear heads of kodo millet.
This fungal infection
produces cyclopiazonic acid (CPA), a mycotoxin
linked to "kodo poisoning,".
Causes and Impact of Kodo Millet Poisoning
Kodo poisoning, locally known as ‘Matawna Kodoo’ or ‘Matona Kodo’ in northern India, often occurs when rainfall during the grain's maturation or harvest leads to fungal contamination.
Infected grains contain resilient mycotoxins that withstand standard food processing methods, making contaminated kodo millet unsafe for consumption.
Impact of the toxic grain on animals
It affects the nervous, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal systems.
Key symptoms include vomiting, dizziness, unconsciousness, rapid pulse, cold extremities, limb tremors, and in severe cases, cardiomyocyte damage and liver dysfunction.
CPA disrupts calcium signaling in the heart, leading to heart muscle lesions and impaired function.
It can also cause gastrointestinal inflammation by increasing reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the intestines.
Animal studies have shown similar toxic effects, with mice displaying depression and loss of mobility, mirroring symptoms observed in affected elephants.
Detection of Fungal Infection in Kodo Millets
Kodo millets are difficult to inspect for toxicity with the naked eye, as they may appear fresh but contain harmful mycotoxins due to high moisture and other factors.
To detect poisoning, chemical trace analysis is required.
Mycotoxins in kodo millets can be identified through advanced chromatographic methods such as thin-layer chromatography (TLC), gas chromatography (GC), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC/MS).
However, due to their time-consuming nature, rapid and cost-effective methods like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), lateral flow assays (LFAs), and biosensors are gaining popularity for on-site detection.
Researchers recommend using
biocontrol agents, such as non-toxigenic fungal strains
, to combat fungal development and mycotoxin production in kodo millet fields.
These biological control methods can be effective for long-term management.
Additionally, farmers are advised to adopt good agricultural practices and post-harvest management techniques, including sorting and storing grains in airtight containers to reduce mycotoxins.
To prevent fungal spread, harvested millet should be kept dry and sheltered from rain, and old practices like moistening plants before threshing should be stopped.
Removing infected grains can further help limit disease spread.
Consumption of kodo millet led to the death of 10 elephants in MP.pdf
( Size:  3.2 MB  )
Click to View More
Environment & Ecology
**********Scarborough Shoal
China recently released geographic coordinates marking baselines around the contested Scarborough Shoal in the South China Sea.
About Scarborough Shoal:
The Scarborough Shoal (also known in English as the
Scarborough Reef
) is an
oceanic coral atoll
that developed on top of a seamount into a triangle shape in the eastern part of the
It is located some 220 kilometers west of the
Philippines’ Island of Luzon.
It is the
largest atoll in
the South China Sea,
submerged at high tide with few rocks above sea level.
This atoll extends 18 km along its northwest-southeast axis and reaches 10 km along its northeast-southwest axis.
The deep waters around the shoal make it a
productive fishing area
, rich in marine life, and the lagoon also contains many commercially valuable shellfish and sea cucumbers.
The shoal is the source of an ongoing and, so far,
unresolved dispute between the People’s Republic of China
and the Philippines,
with both countries claiming that the shoal lies within their territory and saying they have exclusive rights to access its waters.
There are
no structures built
on Scarborough Shoal, but the feature is
effectively controlled by China
, which has
maintained a constant coast guard presence
at the feature
since 2012
, which now refers to the shoal as
Huangyan Island
, makes a
historical claim
to the area, stating that they can
trace their ownership
of the area back to the
Yuan Dynasty of the 1200s.
claim the area
based on
geography
, as it is much closer to the Philippines’ main island of Luzon, which contains the capital, Manila, but lies over 500 miles from China.
It is considered within the Philippines’ 200-nautical mile
exclusive economic zone
the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (
UNCLOS
).
Click to View More
Source :
China sets baselines for contested South China Sea shoal amid dispute with Philippines
International Relations
**********What is Arpactophilus pulawskii?
In a groundbreaking discovery for Indian entomology, researchers have identified a new species of aphid wasp, Arpactophilus pulawskii, in Nagaland’s Khuzama district.
About Arpactophilus pulawskii:
It is a new species of
(target aphids as prey).
It was discovered in
at an altitude of over 1,800 meters.
Arpactophilus species
are primarily native to the
Australasian region.
Members of this genus display
remarkable morphological variation
, including
differences
in body length and head shape, and some exhibit modifications in head size and shape.
They are particularly fascinating because they are among the few
social wasps that exhibit social behavior.
They are known for their
distinctive nesting behavior
, with
females using silk from their abdomen
to create protective cells in old termite galleries
or mud nests.
This discovery marks the
first recorded presence of the genus Arpactophilus outside Australasia.
Arpactophilus pulawskii features a
distinct square-shaped head
with an inverted V-shaped uplifted clypeus and rust-colored body markings.
Additionally, it has a uniquely textured thorax that further sets it apart.
Click to View More
Source :
New Wasp species found in Nagaland; first record outside Australasia
Environment
**********What is Kayakalp Scheme?
The Rajasthan College Education Commissionerate has directed 20 government colleges to get the front facade of their buildings and entry halls painted orange under the Kayakalp Scheme.
About Kayakalp Scheme:
It is an initiative launched by the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW)
on May 15, 2015, under
Swachh Bharat Abhiyan
to promote cleanliness and enhance the quality of healthcare facilities in India.
Objectives:
To promote cleanliness, hygiene, infection control, and
environment-friendly practices in Public Health Facilities (PHFs).
To incentivise and recognise PHFs that show exemplary performance in adhering to standard cleanliness and infection control protocols.
To inculcate a culture of ongoing
assessment and peer review of performance
related to hygiene, cleanliness, and sanitation.
To create and share sustainable practices related
to improved cleanliness in PHFs
linked to positive health outcomes.
The Kayakalp assessment is a
three-tier process
involving
internal, peer, and external assessment
. At the beginning of each financial year, a health facility is assessed, scored, and documented using the pre-defined assessment tool.
parameters
on which the performance of the facility would be judged are as follows:
Hospital/Facility Upkeep
Sanitation and Hygiene
Waste Management
Infection Control
Support Services
Hygiene Promotion
To appreciate the hard work and dedication of the healthcare centres,
five awards are provided
under this scheme:
Two best district hospitals
Two best community health centres or sub-district hospitals
One primary health centre in every district
Cash awards and citations
are provided to the winners judged by the set criteria.
Click to View More
Source :
Rajasthan govt. draws flak over its order to paint college walls orange
Polity & Governance
**********India’s Missed Opportunities in Global Trade Integration - A Call for Rethink on RCEP and CPTPP
Why in news?
With shifting global investments and export opportunities away from China, many Asian countries have capitalized on the "China-plus-one" strategy, leaving India lagging. The recent victory of Donald Trump in the US elections adds new uncertainties to American trade policies, sparking debate on India’s trade strategies.
Recently, NITI Aayog CEO BVR Subrahmanyam argued that
India should consider joining major multilateral trade agreements, such as RCEP and CPTPP, to better integrate into the global economy
. Highlighting that nations like Vietnam and Indonesia have gained significantly, he emphasized that India's Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector, which accounts for 40% of exports, would benefit from such trade alliances.
What’s in today’s article?
India’s Trade Dilemma
India missing the China-plus-one opportunity
Attracting Chinese FDI – pros and Cons
Uncertainty with Trump’s policy
Balancing Protectionism and Integration
In September 2024, Commerce and Industry Minister Piyush Goyal highlighted the risks of joining the China-led RCEP.
He cautioned that it would essentially open the door to a free trade agreement (FTA) with China, increasing the likelihood of goods being dumped into India and worsening the trade deficit.
He noted that India’s trade deficit with China had grown at a compounded annual rate of 42.85% between 2004 and 2014, which he argued has weakened domestic manufacturing.
Global Protectionism and India’s Policy Challenges
As Western nations, including the US and Europe, adopt protectionist measures against rising imports from China, India faces additional challenges.
The US has pledged to increase tariffs on Chinese goods, while Europe has imposed tariffs on Chinese EVs and solar equipment.
NITI Aayog CEO BVR Subrahmanyam emphasized India’s need to lower tariffs to improve private-sector capacity utilization and attract investment, as the sector’s utilization currently stands at 70%.
Trade Negotiation Pause Amid Growing Deficits
In response to rising trade deficits with partners like the UAE and ASEAN, the Commerce Ministry has paused new trade negotiations to establish a new standard operating procedure (SOP).
About China-plus-one strategy
China Plus One, also known as Plus One or C+1, is a business strategy that involves diversifying manufacturing and sourcing away from China.
The goal is to reduce the risk of over-reliance on China for manufacturing and sourcing.
The China Plus One strategy has become more popular in recent years due to a number of factors, including:
The COVID-19 pandemic, The US–China trade war, Rising labor costs in China, and Geopolitical and economic factors
India’s Missed Opportunity in US-China Trade Shift
According to a recent Oxford Economics report, India has lagged behind other Asian countries in capitalizing on the US import demand shift away from China, especially in high-growth sectors.
Although India has achieved production gains, they have not significantly contributed to domestic value addition, unlike in its peer economies.
The report notes a concerning trend in India’s high-tech sector: while exports surged by 350% between 2017 and 2023, domestic value-added output actually fell by 18%.
Manufacturing, by contrast, has shown some promise, with domestic value-added growth at 26%, though still trailing behind merchandise export growth of 44%.
Limited Gains in Electronics and Manufacturing
The US-China tensions and tariff disputes from 2018-2019 spurred hopes for increased US demand for Indian goods, particularly in manufacturing.
In electronics,
India’s share in US imports has grown from 0.2% in 2017 to 2.1% in 2023, a result of the government’s push toward high-tech exports
However, competitors like Vietnam, Taiwan, Malaysia, and Thailand continue to dominate, with each holding a substantially higher market share in US electronics imports.
Chinese Investment Abroad Hits Record High Amid Global Protectionism
Amid escalating protectionist barriers from Western nations, Chinese companies have been ramping up their overseas investments, with overseas assets increasing by approximately $71 billion in Q2 this year — an 80% rise from last year.
However, India has seen limited Chinese investment due to ongoing border tensions, with India’s share in China’s outward direct investment to Asia dropping from 2.6% in 2019 to 1% in 2021.
Concerns Over Chinese Investment in India’s Strategic Sectors
Experts warned that while Chinese firms investing in India could boost short-term trade,
this could undermine India’s long-term economic security and strategic independence
They cautioned that heavy reliance on Chinese companies could expose India to supply chain vulnerabilities and limit opportunities for local industries.
Additionally,
Chinese firms might prioritize their own supply chain interests and potentially bring in foreign staff, which could curb benefits to the Indian workforce and hinder the growth of domestic firms
Trump’s Trade Policies: Potential Implications for India
Donald Trump’s return to the presidency has heightened concerns over potential tariff actions against India.
During his first term, Trump removed India’s duty-free benefits under the Generalised System of Preferences (GSP) program, impacting $5.7 billion worth of Indian exports.
Additionally, Trump’s tariff increases on Chinese goods could indirectly benefit India by driving investment interest toward the country.
Impact on WTO Dispute Resolution and Smaller Economies
Trump previously blocked judge appointments to the WTO’s dispute resolution body, effectively paralyzing it.
While large economies have managed to resolve trade disputes bilaterally, smaller nations remain in a difficult position.
Concerns Over Future Tariffs and Stringent Trade Terms
Analysts fear that a Trump presidency could extend tariff policies beyond China, potentially targeting Indian goods.
Trump might press for reciprocal tariffs and apply increased tariffs on sectors critical to India, such as automobiles, textiles, pharmaceuticals, and wines.
This would reduce Indian competitiveness in the U.S. market, posing risks to revenue and market access for Indian exports.
New opportunities may open for Indian exporters
As the US intensifies its stance on China, new opportunities may open for Indian exporters to fill gaps left by restricted Chinese imports.
newspaper.pdf
( Size:  3.6 MB  )
Click to View More
International Relations
**********Supreme Court Verdict on Property Rights and State Acquisition of Private Property
Why in News?
The Supreme Court of India’s (SC) judgement in the Property Owners Association & Ors v State of Maharashtra case, marked a shift in how it views state’s acquisition of private property.
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background of the Property Owners Association & Ors v State of Maharashtra Case
Understanding Articles 39(b) & 31C
The Property Owners Association & Ors v State of Maharashtra Case
Diverging Opinions in the Property Owners Association & Ors v State of Maharashtra Case
Conclusion
Background of the Property Owners Association & Ors v State of Maharashtra Case:
This case concerned a Maharashtra law
allowing the acquisition of certain privately owned dilapidated buildings in Mumbai.
The law claimed to enact Article 39(b) of the Constitution of India.
The Bombay HC upheld this law in 1991
, stating it was protected under
Article 31C
, originally introduced in 1971 to promote socialist objectives under the Indira Gandhi government.
Understanding Articles 39(b) & 31C:
: It requires the state to ensure “ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good.”
Article 31C:
It has two parts:
First part:
Exempts laws promoting Article 39(b) or (c) from being challenged for inconsistency with Articles 14, 19, or 31.
Second part:
Shields these laws from court scrutiny, provided they claim to uphold Article 39(b) or (c). However, this part was struck down in
the Kesavananda Bharti case (1973).
Later, the scope of Article 31C was expanded by
the 42nd Amendment in 1976
but was partially invalidated by the
Minerva Mills case (1980)
The Property Owners Association & Ors v State of Maharashtra Case:
About the judgement:
It is led by a 9-judge bench of the SC
(chaired by the Chief Justice of India [CJI]), and addressed two primary questions:
The current status of Article 31C
of the Constitution of India and whether it still exists despite previous amendments being struck down.
The scope of Article 39(b)
and its implications for the state's authority to acquire private property as “material resources of the community.”
The status of Article 31C:
The case challenged the Bombay HC's interpretation, contending that the Minerva Mills ruling effectively invalidated Article 31C.
The court clarified
that Minerva Mills only removed the expanded scope but preserved the original version from Kesavananda Bharti,
keeping Article 31C operative in its original form.
All justices on the bench agreed that
this interpretation remains consistent with constitutional principles.
Interpretation of Article 39(b):
The court next examined whether Article 39(b) allows the acquisition of all private property as community resources.
Referring to Justice Krishna Iyer’s earlier views, the court clarified that
not all private property falls under “material resources of the community.”
The court established four criteria
to determine if private property could be deemed a community resource:
Nature of the resource:
Its inherent characteristics.
Community impact:
How the resource affects societal well-being.
Resource scarcity:
Availability of the resource.
Concentration consequences:
Risks of resource concentration among private owners.
Diverging Opinions in the Property Owners Association & Ors v State of Maharashtra Case:
Majority opinion:
Emphasised the shift from a purely public-investment economy to one with both public and private investments, suggesting that not all private property qualifies as community resources.
Justice Nagarathna’s concurrence:
Supported a broader interpretation, arguing that changing socio-economic policies shouldn’t alter Article 39(b)’s intent.
Justice Dhulia’s dissent:
Advocated for including all private resources under community resources to address ongoing wealth inequality.
Conclusion:
The SC’s decision in this case has
redefined the interpretation of Article 39(b) while retaining the original version of Article 31C
This verdict reflects the judiciary's approach to
balancing state welfare objectives with private property rights
, adapted to India’s evolving socio-economic landscape.
Click to View More
Polity & Governance
**********On Improving Wind Energy Generation
What’s in Today’s Article?
Introduction (Context of the Article)
Wind Energy (Capacity in India, Tamil Nadu Case Study, Current Policy, Challenges, Way Forward)
Introduction:
Tamil Nadu has long been a pioneer in wind energy generation in India, with its first wind turbines installed over 30 years ago.
Recently, the Tamil Nadu government introduced the "
Tamil Nadu Repowering, Refurbishment, and Life Extension Policy for Wind Power Projects - 2024
" to modernize aging wind turbines and improve efficiency.
However, the policy has faced opposition from wind energy generators who claim it does not effectively support wind energy growth.
Here’s a closer look at the current status of wind energy in Tamil Nadu and the challenges involved in boosting its capacity.
Current Wind Energy Capacity in India and Tamil Nadu:
National Potential
: According to the National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE),
India has a wind power potential of 1,163.86 GW at a height of 150 meters
, making it one of the top countries globally for wind energy capacity.
Installed Capacity
: Currently,
India uses only about 6.5% of its potential wind energy capacity
. Tamil Nadu, with 10,603.5 MW of installed capacity, ranks second in India and contributes significantly to the national wind power production.
Aging Infrastructure
: Tamil Nadu has around 20,000 wind turbines, half of which are less than 1 MW in capacity, making them less efficient compared to modern turbines.
Understanding Repowering and Refurbishment of Wind Turbines:
This involves replacing old turbines, especially those over 15 years old or with a capacity of less than 2 MW, with new, higher-capacity turbines to increase output.
For instance, a 2 MW turbine requires 3.5 acres and can generate up to 6.5 million units of power annually, while a modern 2.5 MW turbine, standing at 140 meters, requires five acres and can generate around 8 million units.
This process includes upgrading components such as turbine blades, gearboxes, and increasing the height of turbines to improve efficiency without complete replacement.
Involves implementing safety and structural upgrades on older turbines to extend their operational life.
Challenges with the New Policy and Industry Opposition:
Wind energy generators have raised several concerns regarding the new policy, leading them to approach the Madras High Court, which has temporarily halted its implementation.
The main issues include:
Land Requirements for Higher Capacity Turbines
: Upgrading to larger turbines, like 2.5 MW models, requires more land, which is not always available near existing installations.
Infrastructure Delays
: Projects aimed at enhancing transmission infrastructure, such as the construction of sub-stations, have faced delays. At Aralvaimozhi, a high-potential site, plans for new sub-stations have stalled for six years, impacting the ability to harness maximum wind energy from the area.
Banking Restrictions
: The policy treats repowered turbines as new installations, which makes them ineligible for the banking of generated energy. Without banking facilities, the financial viability of these projects is reduced, as producers cannot store excess energy for future use.
Tamil Nadu’s Repowering Potential and the Way Forward:
Tamil Nadu has the highest repowering potential among Indian states
, with over 7,000 MW of capacity that could be repowered or refurbished.
Experts estimate that by upgrading smaller turbines, wind energy contributions during peak seasons could increase by 25%.
However, stakeholders in the industry feel that the policy should address field-level challenges and financial constraints to make repowering more attractive. For example:
Field-Level Solutions
: Generators are calling for policies that consider practical challenges such as land acquisition, infrastructure requirements, and community concerns around newer, taller turbines.
Financial Viability
: Many investors, especially those from industries such as textiles that rely on renewable energy, are unwilling to invest in wind energy projects unless they are financially viable. The current policy does not provide enough commercial incentives to encourage these investments.
On improving wind energy generation.pdf
( Size:  268.8 KB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********Can India get rich before growing old?
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Demographic dividend in the context of Indian economy;
Why in the News?
Since liberalization opened up new opportunities, there has been a lot of excitement about India’s demographic dividend, which is the advantage of having a large working-age population but there are major challenges like the middle-income trap.
Can India leverage its sustained economic growth?
Harnessing the Demographic Dividend
: With a large working-age population, India has a potential advantage, but it must ensure that this workforce is employed in productive sectors, particularly by shifting labor from low-productivity agriculture to higher-productivity manufacturing and services.
Strengthening the Manufacturing Sector
: The manufacturing sector, especially labor-intensive industries like textiles, has the potential to create millions of jobs. By addressing barriers such as complex regulations, high tariffs, and infrastructure constraints, India can boost manufacturing growth, empower women, and drive economic mobility.
Reforming Infrastructure and Business Environment
: Improving ease of doing business, simplifying trade and labor regulations, and increasing investment in infrastructure are critical for unlocking India’s potential for sustained growth. These reforms will enable large-scale job creation and enhance India’s global competitiveness.
Challenges arising due to the middle-income trap
Declining Demographic Dividend
: The proportion of working-age individuals in India’s population is set to decline in the coming decade, marking the potential end of the demographic dividend. Fertility rates have dropped across various states, which means India may face an aging population sooner than expected.
Stagnation in Key Sectors
: India has struggled to reduce its agricultural workforce in the same way China did after liberalisation, making it harder to transition people to higher-productivity industries. Despite some growth in the services sector, manufacturing has stagnated and failed to generate the necessary number of jobs, especially in labor-intensive industries.
Limited Economic Mobility
: High levels of youth unemployment and the lack of opportunities for individuals to move up the economic ladder have hindered India’s economic progress. The country’s labor force participation rate (LFPR) remains low, particularly among women, and urban job creation has not been sufficient to absorb the growing population.
Infrastructure and Regulatory Bottlenecks
: The business environment is constrained by complex regulations, high tariffs, cumbersome licensing procedures, and a lack of access to land, all of which prevent the manufacturing sector from thriving. India’s slow regulatory reforms have stifled growth in manufacturing, which is essential for absorbing the workforce.
How the Manufacturing sector can help India grow?
Job Creation
: Manufacturing, especially in labour-intensive sectors like textiles and apparel, can create large numbers of jobs. This is vital for absorbing the surplus labour from agriculture and providing employment opportunities for the youth.
For example, the textile and apparel industry employs 45 million people compared to just 5.5 million in IT-BPM, highlighting its potential for mass employment.
Women’s Empowerment
: Manufacturing, particularly industries like textiles, offers significant employment to women (60-70% of factory workers), helping reduce gender disparities in the labour force.
: By creating better job opportunities, manufacturing helps people transition from low-productivity agricultural jobs to higher-wage, more stable positions in the industrial and service sectors. This transition is key to achieving sustained economic growth and avoiding the middle-income trap.
Global Competitiveness
: Reducing barriers to manufacturing — such as simplifying business licensing, lowering tariffs on inputs, improving access to land, and streamlining trade regulations — can help India increase its competitiveness globally. Expanding market access through free trade agreements and making the business environment more conducive to manufacturing can unlock the potential of this sector.
Steps taken by the government:
“Make in India” Initiative
: Launched in 2014, this initiative aims to transform India into a global manufacturing hub by promoting domestic production, reducing regulatory hurdles, and attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) in key manufacturing sectors such as electronics, textiles, and automobiles.
Atmanirbhar Bharat (Self-reliant India)
: This program focuses on reducing dependence on imports by boosting local manufacturing, especially in strategic sectors like defense, electronics, and pharmaceuticals.
It includes initiatives such as the
Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme
, which offers incentives for manufacturing and exporting specific products like electronics, textiles, and solar panels.
Way forward:
Enhance Skill Development and Workforce Transition
: India must invest in targeted skill development programs to equip its labor force, particularly those transitioning from agriculture, with the necessary skills for higher-productivity manufacturing and services sectors.
Accelerate Regulatory and Infrastructure Reforms
: To unlock the full potential of the manufacturing sector, India should expedite regulatory reforms, simplify land acquisition processes, and enhance infrastructure.
Mains PYQ:
Can the strategy of regional-resource-based manufacturing help in promoting employment in India?
(UPSC IAS/2019)
**********What are the costs of population decline?
Governance
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Issues related to low fertility rate;
Why in the News?
The Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have recently voiced concerns over the low fertility rates in their states.
What is the current demographic situation, especially in the southern States?
Falling Fertility Rates
: Southern states like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, and Kerala have fertility rates below the replacement level of 2.1.
For instance, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal recorded fertility rates of 1.4 (2019-21), and Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, and Kerala at 1.5.
Ageing Population
: These states face an advanced demographic transition with an increasingly ageing population. The share of elderly in Kerala is expected to rise to 22.8% by 2036, in Tamil Nadu to 20.8%, and in Andhra Pradesh to 19%.
End of Demographic Dividend
: With a rising old age dependency ratio — Kerala (26.1), Tamil Nadu (20.5), and Andhra Pradesh (18.5) in 2021 — the demographic window for leveraging a young workforce is closing or has already closed in these states.
What is the likely economic impact?
Rising Healthcare Costs
: The elderly demographic is likely to increase healthcare costs. Southern states, comprising one-fifth of India’s population, accounted for 32% of out-of-pocket cardiovascular healthcare expenditure in 2017-18.
Reduced Economic Growth Potential
: A declining working-age population means a lower potential to reap economic benefits from a young labor force. This demographic shift may impact productivity and economic growth.
Impact on Women’s Labor Force Participation
: Pro-natalist policies to increase fertility may lead to a reduction in women’s participation in the labor force, hindering economic growth further.
What are the political implications?
Federal Representation Changes
: With the 2026 delimitation, seats in Parliament are expected to be adjusted based on population. Southern states could lose representation due to slower population growth, with Tamil Nadu potentially losing nine seats, Kerala six, and Andhra Pradesh five, while northern states like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Rajasthan may gain seats.
Resource Allocation
: Slower-growing southern states contribute more tax revenue yet may receive a smaller share of resources from the central pool, as allocation formulas often consider population.
What are the solutions being considered? (Way forward)
Pro-natalist Incentives
: Some southern leaders advocate incentivizing families to have more children. However, international experiences show limited success with pro-natalist incentives.
Gender Equity and Family Policies
: Policies such as paid maternity/paternity leave, accessible childcare, and employment protections can support sustainable fertility rates without economically disadvantaging women.
Increasing Working Age and Migrant Inclusion
: Extending working lifespans and better integrating economic migrants in social security and political representation can help mitigate the impact of an ageing population.
Balancing Migration Needs
: Southern states, which attract many economic migrants, face challenges as these migrants are still counted in their home states, impacting political representation and resource distribution in the host states.
Mains PYQ:
Critically examine whether growing population is the cause of poverty OR poverty is the mains cause of population increase in India.
(UPSC IAS/2015)
**********Calling out exploitative labour dynamics on platforms 
Indian Society
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Issues related to Gig workers;
Why in the News?
Amid the ongoing evolution of the “gig worker” concept, India recently witnessed a groundbreaking movement a nationwide digital strike organized by women gig workers this Deepavali.
What are the specific exploitative practices faced by gig workers?
Wage Theft and High Commissions:
Many gig workers receive only a fraction of their earnings after substantial deductions for company commissions, which can range from 10% to 35% of their total income. This often leaves them with minimal take-home pay, insufficient to meet basic living expenses.
Forced Purchases and Costs:
Workers are often required to buy product kits at full retail prices from their employers, which further erodes their earnings. This practice restricts their ability to purchase necessary supplies at more affordable wholesale rates.
Job Insecurity and Rating Systems:
Gig workers are subjected to biased rating systems that can lead to job insecurity. If they refuse “auto-assigned” jobs or fail to meet performance metrics, they risk being blocked from the platform or terminated without recourse.
Lack of Social Security:
Gig workers are excluded from essential benefits such as minimum wages, health protections, and social security rights, leaving them vulnerable in times of need.
How do platform dynamics contribute to labour exploitation?
Misclassification of Workers:
Gig workers are often classified as independent contractors rather than employees, which denies them access to fundamental labour rights and protections. This legal loophole allows companies to evade responsibilities related to wages and benefits.
Algorithmic Control:
Companies utilize complex algorithms to manage worker assignments and ratings, creating a system where workers are constantly monitored and evaluated based on performance metrics that may not accurately reflect their work quality.
Patriarchal Structures:
The gig economy perpetuates existing patriarchal norms by relegating women to traditionally female roles such as beauticians and housekeepers, limiting their job options and negotiating power within the labour market.
What measures can address and combat labour exploitation in this sector? (Way forward)
Legal Recognition as Employees:
Governments should legislate the recognition of gig workers as employees rather than independent contractors, thereby extending labour rights such as minimum wage laws and social security benefits.
Regulatory Frameworks:
Establishing comprehensive labour laws specific to the gig economy would help protect workers’ rights. This includes mechanisms for grievance redressal, ensuring fair treatment and accountability from platform companies.
Collective Bargaining Rights:
Supporting unionization efforts like those of the Gig and Platform Services Workers Union (GIPSWU) can empower workers to negotiate better wages and working conditions collectively. This grassroots organizing is crucial for achieving meaningful change in labour practices within the sector
Mains PYQ:
Examine the role of ‘Gig Economy’ in the process of empowerment of women in India.
(UPSC IAS/2021)
**********LignoSat: the First Wooden Satellite launched into space
Science Tech
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
LignoSat Satellite
Why in the News?
The
world’s
first wood-panelled satellite
, LignoSat, was recently launched to test the use of timber as a renewable material for future space missions.
About
LignoSat Satellite:
Details
Purpose
To test the potential of wood as a renewable building material in space applications.
Developed By
Kyoto University
and
Sumitomo Forestry
of Japan.
Launch Details
Launched on
November 5
aboard a
SpaceX Dragon cargo capsule
Mission Duration
Spend a month at the
International Space Station (ISS)
before being deployed into
Earth’s orbit
six months
to test its performance.
Size and Weight
Measures
4 inches (10 cm)
per side and weighs
900 grams
Material
Built with
magnolia wood panels
, using a traditional Japanese technique that avoids screws and glue.
Construction
Combines
wood-panel casings
aluminium structures
and standard
electronic components
Durability Testing
Designed to withstand
extreme temperature fluctuations
in space, ranging from
-100 to 100 degrees Celsius
every
45 minutes
LignoSat as a Renewable Solution for Space Construction
Reduced Environmental Impact:
Unlike conventional aluminium-based satellites, LignoSat reduces pollutants like
aluminium oxides
that damage the ozone layer upon re-entry.
Sustainable Material:
Wood is a renewable, lightweight, and corrosion-resistant material in space, as there is no water or oxygen to accelerate degradation.
Long-Term Vision:
The satellite could pave the way for
sustainable space construction
, with future plans to use wood in building structures on the
Moon
Mars
Mitigating Orbital Congestion:
As satellite constellations grow, sustainable materials like wood could help reduce
space debris
and pollution in Earth’s orbit.
PYQ:
[2016]
With reference to ‘AstroSat’, the astronomical observatory launched by India, which of the following statements is/are correct?
1. Other than USA and Russia, India is the only country to have launched a similar observatory into space.
2. AstroSat is a 2000 kg satellite placed in an orbit at 1650 km above the surface of the Earth.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
**********APOBEC (Apolipoprotein B mRNA Editing Catalytic Polypeptide)
Science Tech
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
Since smallpox was eradicated in 1980, research on
mpox
has highlighted how the virus mutates, particularly through the
APOBEC family of immune system proteins
.
About
APOBEC (Apolipoprotein B mRNA Editing Enzyme, Catalytic Polypeptide-Like)
is a family of proteins involved in regulating the genetic material of viruses and cells.
They are
part of the human immune system
and play a crucial
role in protecting against viral infections
by
editing RNA and DNA
APOBEC consists of several
enzymes
, with
APOBEC1, APOBEC3
family members being the most well-known.
There are
11 identified members
of the APOBEC family, primarily named APOBEC1, APOBEC2, and APOBEC3, with APOBEC3 being the most studied due to its antiviral properties.
It has a
Zinc Finger Domain
, which is essential for their enzymatic activity and ability to bind to DNA or RNA.
APOBEC proteins are
found in various tissues and cells
, but they are notably present in the
immune cells
such as
T-cells
B-cells
macrophages
Role in Immune Defense
APOBEC proteins contribute to the
innate immune response
editing viral genomes
, preventing the replication of viruses, and reducing the ability of viruses to establish infections.
They are known to be
cytosine deaminases
, which means they modify cytosine bases in nucleic acids to uracil, leading to mutations that can prevent successful viral replication.
APOBEC proteins target the genomes of several viruses, including
retroviruses
(like
HIV
),
hepatitis B virus
poxviruses
(such as
).
Functions of APOBEC Proteins:
DNA Editing
: APOBEC proteins can deaminate
bases in single-stranded DNA, converting them into
, which can lead to
This introduces errors in the viral genome and inhibits replication.
: Some APOBEC proteins, like
, are involved in editing mRNA. In the case of
, it helps edit the mRNA of
apolipoprotein B
, which is crucial for lipid metabolism.
Antiviral Activity
: APOBEC3 proteins, particularly
APOBEC3G
, inhibit the replication of HIV and other retroviruses by editing viral DNA during reverse transcription.
They also reduce the replication of
), making them crucial in controlling infections caused by these viruses.
Cytosine Deamination in Viral RNA
: APOBEC proteins induce mutations in viral RNA, reducing the virus’s ability to efficiently replicate and spread. This helps prevent viral evolution and adaptation.
Inhibition of Viral Resistance
: By causing mutations in viral genomes, APOBEC proteins prevent viruses from easily developing resistance to the immune system’s defenses.
Interaction with Other Immune Mechanisms
: APOBEC proteins work in concert with other immune mechanisms, like
interferons
, to enhance antiviral responses and limit infections.
PYQ:
[2016]
In the context of the developments in Bioinformatics, the term ‘transcriptome’, sometimes seen in the news, refers to:
(a) a range of enzymes used in genome editing
(b) the full range of mRNA molecules expressed by an organism
(c) the description of the mechanism of gene expression
(d) a mechanism of genetic mutations taking place in cells
**********Asia Tea Alliance not in favor of GM Tea
Economics
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Asia Tea Alliance, Tea Cultivation in India
Why in the News?
The
Asia Tea Alliance (ATA)
resolved to reject
Genetically Modified (GM) Tea
in response to climate challenges affecting global tea production.
With
India’s tea production down by 10% this year
due to climate change, certain companies have advocated for GM tea.
What is Asia Tea Alliance (ATA)?
Founded
: April 19, 2019, in
Guizhou, China
5 Members
: India, China, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Japan.
Goals
: Enhance tea trade, cultural exchange, and globally promote tea.
About Indian Tea Industry:
India is the
second-largest tea producer
largest black tea producer
after China, and also the
fourth-largest tea exporter
worldwide.
largest consumer
of black tea, accounting for
18% of global tea consumption
The Indian tea industry directly employs
1.16 million workers
, with an equal number indirectly associated.
It is governed by the
Tea Board of India
and under
Union Government control
by an Act of Parliament.
Geographical conditions:
Northeast India
(including
Assam
), north Bengal (such as
Darjeeling,
Terai
and the
Dooars
), and the
Nilgiris
in south India.
Tropical and subtropical climates
, with regions concentrated in
Asia, Africa, and South America
favours tea cultivation.
It requires
cool to warm temperatures
(15–23°C) with at least 5 hours of sunlight daily; annual rainfall should be
150-200 cm
Darjeeling Tea
known as the “
Champagne of teas
,” for its aroma was the first to GI tag in 2004–05.
PYQ:
[2020]
“The crop is subtropical in nature. A hard frost is injurious to it. It requires at least 210 frost-free days and 50 to 100 centimeters of rainfall for its growth. A light well-drained soil capable of retaining moisture is ideally suited for the cultivation of the crop.” Which one of the following is that crop?
(a) Cotton
(b) Jute
(c) Sugarcane
(d) Tea
**********Caterpillar fungus
Science Tech
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
Recent research by scientists at the University of Nottingham’s has found that a
chemical produced by a fungus growing on caterpillars
may slow cancer cell growth.
What is Caterpillar fungus?
Cordyceps militaris
, also known as
caterpillar fungus
, is a parasitic fungus that primarily infects caterpillars and other insects.
Found in the
Himalayan region
and parts of
Asia
, it is valued in
traditional Asian medicine
for its health benefits, including
immune support
anti-inflammatory properties
, and
energy enhancement
It is considered a
delicacy
in some Asian cultures and has long been used for its purported wellness effects.
How it can slow down growth of cancer cells?
Researchers from the
University of Nottingham’s School of Pharmacy
have identified
cordycepin
, a compound produced by
, as potentially effective in
slowing cancer cell growth
Cordycepin works by
interrupting overactive cell growth signals
in cancer cells, which prevents rapid multiplication and allows for more targeted treatment.
This approach may be
less harmful to healthy tissues
compared to conventional cancer treatments, offering a promising direction for
targeted cancer therapies
Other observations and significance of the species
In addition to its traditional uses,
is significant for its
role in ecological balance
, helping control insect populations in forest ecosystems.
Advances in research have enabled large-scale studies on
cordycepin’s effects
, with future studies focusing on
derivatives of cordycepin
for potentially enhanced anti-cancer properties.
The fungus illustrates how
natural compounds
can contribute to sustainable medical practices, offering
less toxic alternatives
for disease treatment, especially in oncology.
PYQ:
[2019]
Recently, there was a growing awareness in our country about the importance of Himalayan nettle (Girardinia diversifolia) because it is found to be a sustainable source of:
(a) Anti-malarial drug
(b) Biodiesel
(c) Pulp for paper industry
(d) Textile fibre
**********IDF working on new guidelines to treat Type 2 Diabetes
Science Tech
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
International Diabetes Federation, Type 2 Diabetes
Why in the News?
The
International Diabetes Federation (IDF)
is developing new
diabetes
treatment guidelines
in collaboration with a global expert panel.
These guidelines aim to integrate
scientific evidence
and
clinical practice
, adapted to the healthcare environment of specific countries.
What is Type 2 Diabetes?
Type 2 Diabetes is a chronic condition where the
body becomes resistant to insulin
or doesn’t produce enough, leading to high blood sugar levels.
It is commonly linked to
obesity, physical inactivity and poor diet
Symptoms include
increased thirst
frequent urination
, fatigue, and blurred vision.
Treatment
involves
lifestyle changes
like a healthy diet, regular exercise, and weight management.
Medications
such as
Metformin
help regulate blood sugar levels, and in some cases, insulin therapy may be required.
About
Details
Establishment
1950; Brussels, Belgium
Membership
Over
230 national diabetes associations
170 countries
and territories.
Purpose
To improve the care and lives of people with diabetes and promote its prevention worldwide.
Mission
Advocacy, research, education, and raising awareness to reduce the global burden of diabetes.
Key Programs
– World Diabetes Day (November 14)
– Global Diabetes Atlas
– Diabetes Advocacy
– Educational initiatives for healthcare professionals
Diabetes Types Covered
Type 1 Diabetes:
Primarily affects children and young adults, where the body’s immune system attacks the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas.
Type 2 Diabetes:
The most common form, often linked to lifestyle factors and obesity. It involves insulin resistance and eventually pancreas dysfunction.
Gestational Diabetes:
A type of diabetes that occurs during pregnancy and increases the risk of developing Type 2 diabetes later in life.
Other Forms:
Covers
genetic forms
latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA)
MODY (Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young)
Collaborations
Partners with global organizations like the
World Health Organization (WHO)
UNICEF
, and others for global health initiatives.
Leadership
Led by an elected
President
with the support of a
Board of Directors
from member countries.
Regional Offices
Operates regional offices in
Africa, Europe, North America, Asia, Latin America
, and the
Middle East
**********