Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve (NSTR)
According to the recently released ‘EnviStats India-2024’ report, the Nagarjuna Sagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve (NSTR) has been ranked first among India’s 55 tiger reserves for its leopard population, with an estimated 360 leopards.
About Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve (NSTR):
Location
: It is located in the
Nallamala hill ranges
(an offshoot of the Eastern Ghats) of
Andhra Pradesh
This is the
largest tiger reserve in the country
, spreading over an area of 5937 sq. km.
It hosts the
largest tiger population
named after
two major dams
in the area,
Nagarjuna Sagar Dam
and
Srisailam Dam
Two wildlife sanctuaries, namely
Rajiv Gandhi Wildlife Sanctuary
Gundla Brahmeswaram Wildlife Sanctuary
(GBM),
constitute the
The
river Krishna
traverses through this reserve for a linear distance of around 270 kilometers.
Topography
: It consists of plateau, ridges, gorges, and deep valleys.
Vegetation
Tropical dry deciduous forests
have an undergrowth of bamboo and grass.
Flora
: The habitat has several endemics like Andrographis nallamalayana, Eriolaena lushingtonii, Crotalaria madurensis Var, Dicliptera beddomei, and Premna hamiltonii.
Fauna
Top faunal species include
Tiger, Leopard, Wolf
, Wild Dog and Jackal.
The prey species are represented by
Sambar, Chital, Chowsingha
, Chinkara, Mouse Deer, Wild boar, and Porcupine.
The river Krishna has
Muggers
, Otters and Turtles.
Click to View More
Source :
Nagarjuna Sagar Srisailam Tiger Reserve tops in increase of leopard population
Environment
**********Kalleshwar Temple
A 13th-century stone inscription, or Veeragallu, has been recently uncovered during the renovation of the ancient Kalleshwar temple.
About Kalleshwar Temple:
It is a
Hindu temple
located in the town of Bagali in the Davangere district of
Karnataka
It is one of the oldest temples in the region and is dedicated to
Lord Shiva.
The
construction
of the temple
spans the rule of
two Kannada dynasties
: the
Rashtrakuta Dynasty
mid-10th century
, and the
Western Chalukya Empire,
the reign of
founding King Tailapa II
around 987 AD.
Architecture:
The temple is a
single shrine construction
with an adjoining hall (mantapa).
The temple, which faces east, comprises a sanctum, an antechamber (or vestibule or antarala, whose tower is called the sukhanasi), that connects the sanctum to a gathering hall (sabhamantapa), which is preceded by a main hall (mukhamantapa).
Shikara
of the temple is a perfect example of early
Cholan architecture
The temple houses a
large Shivalinga
, which is believed to be more than a thousand years old.
This temple is protected as a monument of national importance by the Archaeological Survey of India.
Click to View More
Source :
13th-century stone inscription discovered in Davanagere district
History
**********Key Facts about Earthworms
Tens of thousands of species of earthworms are likely to be wriggling in the world’s soil, yet to be discovered by scientists – which will probably take more than 100 years to do.
About Earthworms:
They are
terrestrial worms of the class Oligochaeta (phylum Annelida)
—in particular, members of the genus Lumbricus.
Earthworms are
harmless
, often
beneficial residents of the soil
Earthworms occur in virtually all soils of the world in which the moisture and organic content are sufficient to sustain them.
Features
The earthworm body is divided into
ringlike segments
. Some internal organs, including the excretory organs, are duplicated in each segment.
don’t have lungs
; they
breathe through their skin.
They also
lack eyes
, so instead
use receptors in their skin to sense light and touch.
Earthworms have five “hearts” that pump blood through their bodies.
Their food consists of decaying plants and other organisms; as they eat, however, earthworms also ingest large amounts of soil, sand, and tiny pebbles.
hermaphrodites
, meaning
an individual worm has
both
male and female reproductive organs.
Benefits
Earthworms break down dead and decaying organic matter into rich humus soil, thereby supporting plant growth.
Earthworms release waste from their bodies called castings. Castings contain many nutrients that the plant can use.
They also dig tiny channels and make holes that aerate the soil and improve drainage.
Click to View More
Source :
There could be 30,000 species of earthworms wriggling around the world
Environment
**********What are Alkanes?
Researchers have developed a novel method to activate alkanes using confined chiral Brønsted acids, significantly enhancing the efficiency and selectivity of chemical reactions.
About Alkanes:
Alkanes are
organic compounds
that consist
entirely of single-bonded carbon and hydrogen atoms
and lack any other functional groups.
Alkanes have the general formula
CnH2n + 2 (
where n is an integer).
Alkanes can be subdivided into three groups:
linear straight-chain alkanes,
branched
alkanes, and cycloalkanes.
They show little chemical affinity for other substances and are chemically inert to most laboratory reagents.
They are also
relatively inert biologically
and are not often involved in the chemistry of living organisms.
Alkanes do,
however, react with oxygen, halogens
, and a few other substances under appropriate conditions.
Reaction with oxygen occurs during combustion
in an engine or furnace
when an alkane is used as a fuel
Carbon dioxide and water are formed as products, and a large amount of heat is released.
They are commercially very important, being the
principal constituent of gasoline
lubricating oils
and are extensively employed in organic chemistry.
Examples of alkane include methane, ethane, propane, butane, etc.
Click to View More
Source :
Catalyst Magic: Game-Changing Method for Alkane Activation Discovered in Japan
Science & Tech
**********What is Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO)?
The Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) recorded the statement of the daughter of Kerala Chief Minister and owner of a now-dormant information technology firm, raising a political storm recently.
About Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO):
It is a corporate
fraud investigating agency
set up by the Government of India.
The SFIO was established on 21st July, 2015. Section 211 of the
Companies Act
, 2013,
accorded a
statutory status
to the SFIO.
SFIO is a multi-disciplinary organization under the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
, consisting of experts in the fields of accountancy, forensic auditing, law, information technology, investigation, company law, capital markets and taxation
for detecting and prosecuting
or recommending for the prosecution of white-collar crimes/frauds.
SFIO takes up for
investigation cases characterized by:
Complexity and having interdepartmental and multidisciplinary ramifications.
Substantial involvement of public interest to be judged by size, either in terms of monetary.
The possibility of investigation leading to or contributing towards a clear improvement in systems, laws, or procedures.
Investigate serious cases of fraud received from the Department of Company Affairs.
Investigation into the affairs of a company is assigned to SFIO, where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary to investigate into the affairs of a company-
on receipt of a
report of the Registrar or inspector
under section 208 of the Companies Act, 2013
intimation of a special resolution passed by a company
that its affairs are required to be investigated
In the
public interest;
or on request from any department of the Central Government or a State Government
can also take up cases on its own only when decided by the Director of the SFIO,
and also giving the reasons for taking up the case in writing.
Upon assignment of a case
to the SFIO,
no other investigative agency can proceed with
an investigation
for any offence under the Act.
headed by a Director as Head of Department
in the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
The Director is assisted by Additional Directors, Joint Directors, Deputy Directors, Senior Assistant Directors, Assistant Directors, Prosecutors, and other secretarial staff.
headquarters
of SFIO is in
New Delhi
with its regional offices in Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Kolkata.
Click to View More
Source :
SFIO records statement of Kerala CM’s daughter
Economy
**********What are Dragon drones?
A deadly new weapon has taken to the skies in the Russia-Ukraine war. Both sides have posted visuals of drones appearing to rain down fire — earning this weapon the moniker of “dragon drone”.
About
Dragon Drones:
Dragon drones essentially release a
substance called thermite
— a mixture of
aluminium and iron oxide
— developed a century ago to weld railroad tracks.
Working
When ignited (usually with the help of an electrical fuse), thermite triggers a self-sustaining reaction that is quite difficult to extinguish.
It
can burn through almost anything
, from clothes to trees to military-grade vehicles, and can even burn underwater.
On humans, it causes severe, possibly fatal, burns and bone damage.
Combining thermite with high-precision drones that can bypass traditional defences makes dragon drones ‘highly effective’ and ‘dangerous’
In recent times these dragon drones are believed to have been first deployed in the Russia-Ukraine war around September.
International regulation
The
use of thermite in war is not prohibited under international law
However, the use of such incendiary weapons against civilian targets is barred under the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
— Cold War-era guidance issued under the auspices of the United Nations.
Click to View More
Source :
What are ‘dragon drones’, the latest weapon being used in Russia-Ukraine war?
Science & Tech
**********New Spider Species
A new species of spider, discovered at the origin of Jayamangali river at Devarayanadurga reserve forest of Karnataka has now been recognised as a new genus by arachnologists.
About
New Spider Species:
A new species of spider named
Tenkana Jayamangali,
has been found at Devarayanadurga reserve forest
of Karnataka.
It was named after the nearby
Jayamangali River.
It is a sister species to
T arkavathi and T manu.
It has been added as a
Tenkana jumping spiders
(Salticidae, Plexippina) from South Asia.
Key points about Tenkana genus
Distribution:
The southern states of India (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Telangana) and the northern region of Sri Lanka.
Tenkana appears to be an exclusively
ground-dwelling group
It is often found among
relatively complex microhabitats of shaded
short grasses with dry leaf litter in groves or relatively simpler microhabitats in open, sunny, sparse short grasses associated with rocky outcrops in relatively dry habitats.
Click to View More
Source :
New genus of jumping spider found
Environment
**********What is X-band radar?
After recent devastating floods and landslides in Kerala’s Wayanad district, the Union Ministry of Earth Sciences approved an X-band radar to be installed in the district.
About
X-band radar:
An X-band radar is a radar that
emits radiation
X-band of the electromagnetic spectrum
: 8-12 GHz, corresponding to wavelengths of around 2-4 cm.
The smaller wavelengths allow the
radar to produce images of higher resolution.
However, the greater the frequency of some radiation, the faster it will be attenuated.
Applications
The new radar is expected to be able to
monitor the movements of particles
, such as soil, to inform landslide warnings.
The device will also
perform high temporal sampling
, that is, rapidly sample its environs, allowing it to spot particle movements happening in shorter spans of time.
These radars are typically used for
studies about cloud development
and light precipitation due to their ability to detect tiny water particles and snow.
What is Radar?
Radar is short for ‘
radio detection and ranging’.
device uses radio waves
to determine the distance, velocity and physical characteristics of objects around the device.
A transmitter emits a signal aimed at an object whose characteristics are to be ascertained (in meteorology, this could be a cloud). A part of the emitted signal is echoed by the object back to the device, where a receiver tracks and analyses it.
Weather radar, also
known as Doppler radar,
is a common application of this device. The Doppler effect is the change in the frequency of sound waves as their source moves towards and away from a listener.
In meteorology, Doppler radars can reveal
how fast a cloud is moving
and in which direction based on how the cloud’s relative motion changes the frequency of the radiation striking it.
A pulse-Doppler radar
can measure the intensity of, say, rainfall by emitting radiation in pulses and tracking how often they’re reflected to the receiver.
This way, modern Doppler radars can monitor weather conditions and anticipate new wind patterns, the formation of storms, etc.
Click to View More
Source :
What is Wayanad’s new X-band radar? | Explained
Science & Tech
**********Rare Diseases
Recently, the Delhi High Court issued directions aimed at improving the availability of so-called “orphan drugs”, which are medications used to treat “rare diseases”.
About
Rare Diseases:
A rare disease is a health condition of
low prevalence that affects a small number
of people compared with other prevalent diseases in the general population.
There are 7,000-8,000 classified rare diseases, but less than 5% have therapies available to treat them.
A condition is considered to be a rare disease if its prevalence is
less than one case per 1,000 population.
Categories of rare diseases
In India,
rare diseases are
categorised into three groups
based on the nature and complexity of available treatment options.
Group 1
includes diseases that can
be treated
with a
one-time curative procedure.
Group 2
diseases require
long-term or lifelong treatment
which are relatively less costly and have shown documented benefits, but patients need regular check-ups.
Group 3
diseases are those for which
effective treatments are available, but they are expensive
and must often continue lifelong. There are challenges in selecting the right beneficiaries for these treatments.
Financial assistance for rare diseases in India
In 2021, the
National Policy for Rare Diseases (NPRD)
was launched, under which financial
assistance up to Rs 50 lakh
is provided to patients receiving treatment at identified Centres of Excellence (CoE).
The CoEs include AIIMS in Delhi, PGIMER in Chandigarh and the Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research at Kolkata’s SSKM Hospital.
The Union Health Ministry opened a
Digital Portal for Crowdfunding & Voluntary Donations
with information about patients and their rare diseases, the estimated cost of treatment and bank details of the CoEs.
Donors can choose the CoE and patient treatments they wish to support. Each CoE also has its
own Rare Disease Fund,
which is used with approval from its governing authority.
Click to View More
Source :
Issues in the treatment of ‘rare diseases’, and what the govt can do
Science & Tech
**********Murine Typhus
A 75-year-old man from Kerala who recently travelled to Vietnam and Cambodia was diagnosed with the bacterial disease murine typhus.
About
Murine Typhus:
It is an infectious disease caused by the
flea-borne bacteria Rickettsia typhi
Transmission:
It is transmitted to humans through the
bites of infected fleas.
It is also known as
endemic typhus, flea-borne typhus or flea-borne spotted fever.
Rodents like rats, mice and mongoose, are known to be reservoirs of the disease.
The disease-carrying fleas can also live on other small mammals, including pets such as cats and dogs. Once a flea is infected, it can spread the disease for the rest of its life.
Transmission can also happen through
exposure of mucous membranes
to infected flea faeces.
It is spread when infected flea faeces come into contact with cuts or scrapes in the skin.
Murine typhus is
not spread from one person to another
, or from person to fleas.
The disease has been reported in
coastal tropical and subtropical regions
, where rats are prevalent.
In India,
cases of murine typhus have been reported in the
Northeast, Madhya Pradesh and Kashmir.
Symptoms
The symptoms usually
appear seven to 14 days after the exposure
and include fever, headaches, body aches, joint pains, nausea, vomiting, and stomach aches.
Some people may later
develop rashes on the skin,
days after the initial symptoms.
Treatment
There is
no vaccine currently available
against the disease.
The antibiotic doxycycline is considered effective in therapy, but early diagnosis is vital for treatment.
Click to View More
Source :
Kerala man infected with rare bacterial disease: What to know about murine typhus
Science & Tech
**********Issues in the treatment of rare diseases
Why in news?
The Delhi High Court recently issued directions to improve the availability of
orphan drugs
, which are used to treat rare diseases.
The Centre provides financial assistance to Centres of Excellence (CoE) for treatment, but stakeholders have approached the courts, citing difficulties in accessing these funds.
What’s in today’s article?
Rare diseases
Steps taken by the govt
Criticism
Definition
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), a
is a debilitating,
lifelong condition affecting 1 or fewer people in 1,000
In India, around 55 medical conditions, including
Gaucher’s disease
Lysosomal Storage Disorders (LSDs)
, and certain forms of muscular dystrophy, are classified as rare diseases.
While a majority of rare diseases are believed to be genetic, many — such as some rare cancers and some autoimmune diseases — are not inherited.
Prevalence in India
National Registry for Rare and Other Inherited Disorders (NRROID)
, initiated by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), has recorded
14,472 rare disease patients
in the country.
However, therapies exist for less than 5% of rare diseases, with only 1 in 10 patients receiving disease-specific care.
The treatments available are often prohibitively expensive.
Categories of rare diseases
In India, rare diseases are categorised into three groups based on the nature and complexity of available treatment options.
Group 1
includes diseases that can be treated with a one-time curative procedure.
Group 2
diseases require long-term or lifelong treatment which are relatively less costly and have shown documented benefits, but patients need regular check-ups.
Group 3
diseases are those for which effective treatments are available, but they are expensive and must often continue lifelong.
Associated challenges
Early diagnosis
is a major challenge owing to a variety of factors that include lack of awareness among primary care physicians, lack of adequate screening and diagnostic facilities etc.
Less knowledge of pathophysiology in Indian context
Relatively little is known about the pathophysiology or the
natural history of majority of rare diseases, particularly in the Indian context
Challenges in R&D
Rare diseases are also difficult to research upon as the
patients pool is very small
and it often results in inadequate clinical experience.
High cost
The cost of treatment of rare diseases is prohibitively expensive. For example, treatment for Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) costs approximately Rs. 16 crore.
Many
are patented, making them highly expensive due to limited market size and high development costs.
Pharmaceutical companies often avoid producing these drugs, leading to inflated prices.
Manufacturing orphan drugs domestically
could lower costs, but government incentives such as
tax breaks
would be needed to encourage production.
National Policy for Rare Diseases (NPRD) 2021
In 2021, NPRD was launched, offering financial aid up to
₹50 lakh
for patients undergoing treatment at designated Centres of Excellence (CoEs) such as AIIMS Delhi, PGIMER Chandigarh, and SSKM Hospital in Kolkata.
Digital Portal for Crowdfunding & Voluntary Donations
In 2022, the Health Ministry introduced a Digital Portal for Crowdfunding & Voluntary Donations, providing details about patients, treatment costs, and CoE bank accounts for potential donors.
Financial aid released by the govt
Between 2021 and August 2024, the government released financial aid of ₹3.15 crore (2021-22), ₹34.99 crore (2022-23), ₹74 crore (2023-24), and ₹24 crore (2024-25).
Additionally, ₹35 crore was allocated to improve patient care services by purchasing equipment.
Import Duties and GST Exemptions
Currently, patients importing rare disease medicines are exempt from customs duty, but companies still pay 11% customs duty and 12% GST on these imports.
The Delhi High Court has set a 30-day deadline to process these exemptions for medicines under customs, GST, and income tax laws.
Provision for third-party manufacturing
If treatments for rare diseases are unavailable, the government can invoke provisions of the
Patents Act of 1970
to allow third-party manufacturing or acquire patents to ensure drug availability.
Concerns Over Price Control Exemption
In 2019, the Department of Pharmaceuticals exempted orphan drugs from price controls.
The Delhi High Court raised concerns over this exemption, stating that this practice "cannot continue in this manner."
Delays in Drug Approvals
Delays in approvals, such as for medicines from US-based Sarepta Therapeutics, have impacted patient treatment in India.
The National Rare Diseases Committee highlighted that a delay in approval from the Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) forced CoEs like AIIMS to import drugs through distributors, affecting timely patient care.
Issues in the treatment of rare diseases.pdf
( Size:  2.3 MB  )
Click to View More
Social Issues
**********Rupee Falls Below 84 Per US Dollar Mark
Why in news?
On October 11, 2024, the Indian rupee ended above the 84 per US dollar mark for the first time, closing at 84.07 after touching 84.10 during the day. A day before, the rupee had closed at 83.98.
The fall came amid outflows from foreign institutional investors, concerns over rising oil prices, and higher demand for the US dollar from foreign banks.
What’s in today’s article?
Falling rupee – Meaning, reasons, impact
Outlook for the Rupee
When it is reported that the rupee has fallen to a low of 80 dollars, it basically means that one needs Rs 80 to buy a single dollar.
This is important when buying not just American goods but also other goods and services (say crude oil).
In a free-market economy, the exchange rate is decided by the supply and demand for rupees and dollars.
If, in India,
demand for dollars is more in comparison to the demand for rupee, the exchange rate will fall or weaken for rupee
and rise or strengthen for dollar.
However, in India, the market does not fully determine the exchange rate. RBI occasionally intervenes in the foreign exchange (forex) market to ensure that the rupee's price does not fluctuate too much.
Reasons for falling rupee
Rising Crude Oil Prices
: Increased oil prices have raised concerns about India's trade deficit and inflation.
The West Asia crisis has a bearing on the oil prices.
FII Outflows
: Foreign investors are moving funds to China, following China's stimulus measures.
Foreign investors have been following a strategy of
‘Sell India, Buy China’
after the Chinese authorities announced monetary and fiscal measures to stimulate the slowing economy.
Increased Demand for the US Dollar
: Foreign banks are demanding more US dollars, further pressuring the rupee.
Weak Domestic Markets
: Local stock market performance also contributed to the rupee’s decline.
Impact
It could increase cost of imports, raise overseas education costs, make foreign loans costly for companies and has the potential to stoke inflation, which is already ruling at 7%.
Impact on inflation management
The most crucial impact would be on inflation as the country imports nearly 80% of its crude oil needs.
This would mean that imports would become costlier and travel through the value chain to raise input costs.
Impact on current account deficit
Since a large proportion of India’s imports are dollar-denominated, these imports will get costlier.
Costlier imports, in turn, will widen the trade deficit as well as the current account deficit, which, in turn, will put pressure on the exchange rate.
Positive impact
One positive impact could be that remittances from overseas could become attractive.
A fall in the rupee can also benefit India's exporters - unless they import raw materials, which would become more expensive.
Steps that could be taken to prevent the slide
Sell large amounts of dollars to support rupee (by increasing the supply of dollar)
Raising interest rates to make Indian investment attractive
Removing reserve restrictions on dollar deposits with banks
Allowing traders to make settlements in rupee to reduce dollar dependence.
Analysts expect the rupee to remain volatile, driven by uncertainties in oil prices and fluctuations in the dollar index.
The rupee may face continued pressure from FPI selling and geopolitical uncertainty, particularly from tensions in the Middle East.
Rupee Falls Below 84 Per US Dollar Mark.pdf
( Size:  2.2 MB  )
Click to View More
Economics
**********Genomic Study to Uncover Population History of South Asia
What’s in Today’s Article?
Background (Context of the Article)
About the Study (Key Features, Expected Outcomes, Aryan Migration Theories, etc.)
Conclusion (Meaning of Key Terms)
Background:
In a ground-breaking move, the Indian government has launched an ambitious scientific study using both
ancient and modern genomics
to uncover the
population history of South Asia
This study aims to resolve long-standing debates and conflicting theories about the origins and migration patterns of ancient Indian communities.
The research is being carried out by the
Anthropological Survey of India (AnSI)
, which functions under the Ministry of Culture, in collaboration with the
Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences
, Lucknow, under the Department of Science & Technology.
The project, titled
“Reconstruction of the Population History of South Asia using Ancient and Modern Genomics,”
focuses on DNA extracted from ancient skeletal remains to provide new insights into the region's past.
Key Features of the Study:
Scope & Focus:
The project involves studying
300 ancient skeletal remains
, primarily
cranial bones, tooth fragments
, and other bone pieces.
These remains have been collected from
archaeological sites in India and Pakistan
, including well-known sites from the
Indus Valley Civilization
like
Harappa
Mohenjo-Daro
(now in Pakistan), as well as locations like
Burzahom (J&K)
Nagarjunakonda (Andhra Pradesh)
Maski (Karnataka)
Ropar (Punjab)
Lothal (Gujarat)
These remains were excavated between
1922 and 1958
and are currently in the custody of the
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)
Objective:
The study aims to
reconstruct the origins of ancient Indian communities
by extracting and analysing
from the remains.
It will also shed light on the
living conditions
diets
disease prevalence
of ancient people, allowing for a clearer understanding of how populations moved and interacted over time.
This research is expected to help answer fundamental questions about the
gene pool
environmental adaptation
of ancient Indian civilizations.
Expected Outcomes & Modern Relevance:
Officials believe that this scientific research could provide
conclusive evidence
regarding the
of ancient populations in South Asia.
By comparing ancient DNA with modern DNA, researchers aim to uncover the complex
migration history
of the region, clarifying the role of early civilizations in shaping modern South Asian populations.
Clearer Historical Narrative
This study is expected to reveal how ancient Indian populations expanded and interacted, leading to a more accurate account of India's ancient history.
Understanding Genetic Continuity
Initial findings suggest
continuity in the genetic makeup
of populations over time, without significant external changes.
This challenges earlier theories of large-scale migrations influencing India's demographic history.
Impact on Textbook Narratives
These findings could have implications for school textbooks, such as those produced by
NCERT
, which have already undergone revisions to emphasize the continuity of Indian civilization over
5,000 years
, casting doubts on the theory of Aryan migration.
The Aryan Migration Debate:
The project aims to address one of the most significant and controversial questions in Indian history:
Did the Aryan migration happen?
Aryan Invasion Theory
Proposed by Western scholars in the 19th century, this theory posits that a group of
Aryans
, fair-skinned people from
Central Asia
, migrated to India around
2000-1500 BC
, playing a major role in shaping the
civilization of the Indian subcontinent
Indigenous Theory
Many modern Indian archaeologists argue that the
Aryans were indigenous
to the region and that they lived along the
Saraswati River
When the river dried up, they migrated to other parts of India and settled in the
Recent excavations, such as those at the
4,000-year-old archaeological site in Sinauli (Uttar Pradesh)
, have revealed the existence of
indigenous warrior burials
, weapons, and chariots, which contradict the idea of an external Aryan migration.
Conclusion:
This pioneering study combining
is set to reshape our understanding of
South Asia's population history
By studying DNA from ancient skeletal remains, the project will provide crucial insights into the
genetic evolution
of the Indian subcontinent.
These findings will likely offer new perspectives on
historical debates
, such as the
Aryan migration theory
, and help construct a more accurate narrative of India’s ancient past.
The study is expected to be completed by
December 2025
and holds significant promise for uncovering the
genetic continuity
of ancient civilizations in South Asia.
Meaning of Key Terms:
: The study of an organism’s complete set of DNA, including all of its genes. In this study, both
(from skeletal remains) and
(from current populations) are being analysed to understand historical connections.
DNA Extraction
: The process of isolating DNA from biological samples, which is complex in ancient remains due to the degradation of material over time.
: The study of how ancient populations migrated, settled, and evolved, often focusing on the genetic relationships between modern and ancient peoples.
Govt begins study to find roots of ancient Indian communities.pdf
( Size:  1.9 MB  )
Click to View More
History & Culture
**********Wayanad’s new X-band Radar
What’s in Today’s Article?
About Radar (Meaning, Working, X-band Radar, Why Wayanad Needs X-band Radar)
India’s Radar Technology (X-band, Y-band, NISAR)
Conclusion
Background:
In response to the devastating
floods and landslides
that hit
Wayanad district
, Kerala, in
July 2024
, killing more than 200 people, the
Union Ministry of Earth Sciences
approved the installation of an
X-band radar
.
The landslides, triggered by torrential rains, were compounded by massive debris flow.
This radar is expected to play a crucial role in improving early warning systems for future natural disasters in the region.
What is a Radar and How Does It Work?
stands for
Radio Detection and Ranging
. It works by emitting radio waves toward an object, and then measuring the reflected signal to determine the distance, speed, and characteristics of the object.
In meteorology, radar is used to monitor weather conditions.
The device sends out a signal towards clouds, and the echo helps determine factors like
cloud movement
rainfall intensity
wind patterns
A common type of radar used for weather is the
Doppler radar
, which leverages the
Doppler effect
—the change in frequency of a wave in relation to the observer's movement.
What is an X-band Radar?
An
operates within the
8-12 GHz range
of the electromagnetic spectrum, corresponding to wavelengths of
2-4 cm
This specific wavelength allows for
higher resolution imaging
, making it especially useful for detecting smaller particles like
rain droplets
soil movements
, which are crucial for landslide warnings.
Although X-band radars provide detailed, high-resolution images, they have a
shorter range
compared to other radar types due to higher frequency attenuation.
, the new X-band radar will perform
high temporal sampling
, meaning it will quickly capture and analyse data, which is vital for spotting and tracking particle movements, enabling timely warnings for landslides and other disasters.
Why Does Wayanad Need an X-band Radar?
Wayanad is prone to natural disasters such as
, which are triggered by heavy rainfall during monsoons.
The region's
hilly terrain
soil composition
make it vulnerable to landslides.
The X-band radar will significantly enhance the region’s capability to
monitor soil movement
and provide
real-time alerts
in case of impending disasters.
Installing an X-band radar here can help mitigate disaster risks by:
Tracking
wind speeds
Monitoring
to predict landslides.
Providing early warnings to the authorities and local populations.
India’s Radar Network:
India began using radars for weather forecasting in the early 1950s.
The first indigenously designed
was installed in
New Delhi
in 1970.
Since then, India has expanded its radar network significantly, using different radar types for various purposes:
: These are primarily used for
storm detection
wind finding
due to their ability to detect small particles with high resolution.
S-band radars
: With a lower frequency range (2-4 GHz), S-band radars are designed for
long-range detection
. The first S-band radar for
cyclone detection
Visakhapatnam
India is also undergoing a significant upgrade of its radar infrastructure:
September 2024
, the government launched a ₹2,000-crore initiative,
Mission Mausam
, to install
up to 60 radars by 2026
as part of its first phase.
As part of this upgrade,
56 additional Doppler radars
are set to be installed over the next few years to improve weather forecasting and early warning systems across the country.
NISAR Technology:
In addition to X-band radars, India is collaborating with NASA on a project known as
(NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar).
Scheduled for launch in
2025
, this satellite will use
L-band and S-band radars
to map Earth's landmasses and track environmental changes.
NISAR aims to monitor changes in the Earth’s surface, including those caused by
earthquakes
glacier movements
This project, which has a budget of
$1.5 billion
, highlights the growing importance of radar technology in understanding environmental dynamics.
Conclusion:
The installation of the
X-band radar in Wayanad
is a significant step towards improving disaster preparedness in Kerala, particularly in a region prone to landslides and heavy rainfall.
This radar will enhance the ability to monitor weather conditions in real-time, providing critical early warnings and potentially saving lives.
As India continues to expand and modernize its radar infrastructure through projects like
, the country is better positioned to respond to natural disasters and mitigate their impacts.
What is Wayanad’s new X-band radar_ _ Explained - The Hindu.pdf
( Size:  232.4 KB  )
Click to View More
Science & Tech
**********Why precision medicine in India can’t advance without biobank laws?
Science Tech
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Mains level:
Significance of biobanks;
Why in the News?
Precision medicine is ushering in a new era of personalized healthcare, with its foundations taking shape during the completion of the Human Genome Project by scientists.
What is the current legal framework governing biobanks in India?
Lack of Comprehensive Legislation
: India lacks specific, comprehensive laws governing biobanks. The current framework consists of guidelines rather than enforceable laws, creating gaps in the regulation of biobanking practices.
National Ethical Guidelines by ICMR
: The
Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR)
has issued guidelines on ethical practices in biomedical research involving human participants. However, these guidelines are
not legally binding
and do not address all aspects of biobanking, such as long-term storage and data sharing.
Department of Biotechnology (DBT) Standards
: The DBT has certain practices in place for data storage and analysis, but these also lack enforceability and do not fully cover issues such as informed consent and privacy.
Absence of a Single Regulatory Authority
: India currently does not have a dedicated regulatory authority to oversee biobanks, which leads to inconsistencies and limited oversight in biobanking activities.
How do privacy concerns impact biobank operations and precision medicine?
Informed Consent Issues
: Participants often give consent without detailed information about how their biological samples and associated data will be used, who will have access, and for how long. This lack of transparency raises privacy concerns.
Genetic Data Privacy Risks
: Genetic information can reveal intimate details about an individual’s health and predisposition to diseases, potentially affecting their family members. If data privacy is not robustly protected, it may lead to genetic discrimination in insurance or employment.
Data Sharing Without Proper Regulation
: In the absence of clear legal provisions, data or samples could be shared without proper consent, risking misuse by pharmaceutical companies or research organizations, including foreign entities.
Impact on Public Trust
: Weak data and privacy protections may reduce public willingness to participate in biobank projects, thus limiting the scale and diversity necessary for effective precision medicine research.
What are the ethical implications of biobanking practices in India?
Ownership and Benefit Sharing
: Without legal protections, there is ambiguity regarding the ownership of biological samples. Individuals contributing samples may not receive benefits from commercial applications resulting from their data, raising ethical concerns about fair compensation.
Consent Transparency
: Participants may not fully understand the scope of their consent, especially regarding future uses of their samples and data. This lack of clarity can be considered ethically problematic, as it may involve the exploitation of participants’ contributions.
Risk of Misuse or Mismanagement
: Inconsistent regulations and the absence of penalties for ethical violations create a risk of mishandling samples, unauthorized data access, and exploitation, which may compromise research integrity.
Discrimination Risks
: Genetic information obtained from biobanks could be used to discriminate against individuals based on their health risks or genetic traits, which raises concerns about ethical and legal safeguards.
Way forward:
Establish Comprehensive Legislation
: Develop and implement a comprehensive legal framework specifically governing biobanks, including clear guidelines on informed consent, data protection, ownership rights, and benefit sharing.
Create a Regulatory Authority
: Establish a dedicated regulatory authority to oversee biobank operations, ensuring compliance with ethical standards and legal requirements.
**********Issues in the treatment of ‘rare diseases’, and what the govt can do?
Science Tech
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Definition of Rare Diseases
Mains level:
Issues related to rare disease;
Why in the News?
The Delhi High Court recently issued directives to enhance the availability of “orphan drugs” to combat rare diseases.
About the Delhi High Court Verdict:
The Delhi High Court issued directions aimed at improving the availability of
“orphan drugs,”
which are used to
treat rare diseases.
This intervention seeks to
address challenges
related to the
high cost
of these treatments and the barriers to access for patients with rare diseases in India.
Rare Diseases in India and Their Classification:
Definition:
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), rare diseases are debilitating, lifelong conditions that affect 1 or fewer individuals in 1,000.
Conditions Recognized as Rare Diseases in India:
Approximately 55 conditions, including Gaucher’s disease, Lysosomal Storage Disorders (LSDs), and certain muscular dystrophies, are classified as rare diseases.
National Registry:
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
manages the National Registry for Rare and Other Inherited Disorders (NRROID), which has documented 14,472 patients with rare diseases.
Classification of Rare Diseases in India:
Group 1:
Diseases that can be treated with a
one-time
curative procedure
(e.g., certain enzyme replacement therapies)
Group 2:
Conditions requiring
long-term or lifelong treatment,
which are relatively less expensive and have documented benefits. Regular medical check-ups are necessary for patients.
Group 3:
Diseases for which effective treatments are available, but they are
highly costly
require ongoing, lifelong therapy.
Selecting beneficiaries for these treatments presents a challenge due to the high costs.
Current Funding Policy in India:
National Policy for Rare Diseases (NPRD) 2021:
Launched to provide financial support for the treatment of rare diseases. Patients receiving treatment at designated
Centres of Excellence (CoE)
can get financial assistance up to Rs 50 lakh.
Centres of Excellence:
The CoEs include institutions such as
AIIMS
in Delhi,
PGIMER
in Chandigarh, and the
Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research
at Kolkata’s SSKM Hospital.
Crowdfunding and Voluntary Donations Portal (2022):
Health Ministry
launched a
digital platform
that allows donors to contribute toward the treatment of rare disease patients at CoEs. The portal provides details about patients, their conditions, estimated treatment costs, and bank account information of the CoEs.
Challenges Associated with Orphan Drugs:
Limited Treatment Options:
Therapies are available for fewer than 5% of rare diseases, resulting in less than 10% of patients receiving disease-specific treatment.
High Treatment Costs:
Many existing therapies for rare diseases are prohibitively expensive, putting a significant financial burden on patients and their families.
Regulatory Delays:
Approval processes, such as those from the Drug Controller General of India (DCGI), can be slow. For instance, delays in approving US-based Sarepta Therapeutics’ medicines in India have affected the timely availability of treatments.
Bureaucratic Hurdles:
Decision-making delays and administrative red tape further complicate access to necessary drugs, impacting patient care.
Challenges in Beneficiary Selection:
Due to high treatment costs, identifying and prioritizing beneficiaries for financial assistance is difficult, potentially leaving some patients without support.
Way forward:
Streamline Regulatory Approvals:
Expedite the approval process for orphan drugs by reducing bureaucratic hurdles and establishing a fast-track mechanism for essential treatments, ensuring timely access to life-saving medications.
Increase Financial Support and Expand Coverage:
Enhance the funding cap under the National Policy for Rare Diseases and extend financial assistance to more patients, while encouraging public-private partnerships and innovative funding mechanisms like insurance coverage for rare disease treatments.
**********Scuttling people’s Right to Information (RTI)
Governance
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Features of the RTI
Mains level:
Issues related to RTI;
Why in the News?
Governments are undermining the RTI Act by delaying the appointment of information commissioners, causing commissions to struggle with increasing backlogs, according to a 2023-24 report of Satark Nagrik Sangathan.
About Satark Nagrik Sangathan (SNS):
Satark Nagrik Sangathan (SNS) is
not a government-based organization
; rather, it is a
citizens’ organization
focused on promoting transparency, accountability, and good governance in India.
A citizen organization is a
non-governmental group
formed by individuals who come together to advocate for specific causes, promote social change, or address community issues..
Current Challenges Facing the Implementation of the RTI Act:
Vacant Posts in Information Commissions
: Many information commissions have unfilled vacancies, which severely affects their functioning. For instance, the
Central Information Commission
has eight out of 11 positions vacant. Some state commissions, like those in Jharkhand, Tripura, and Telangana, have been defunct for years.
Mounting Backlogs
: The lack of sufficient information commissioners has led to over 4 lakh pending appeals and complaints. In some states, such as
Chhattisgarh and Bihar
, a fresh appeal may not be disposed of until 2029.
Bias in Appointments
: A majority of appointed commissioners are retired government officials or individuals with political affiliations, leading to reluctance to take action against transparency violations.
Failure to Impose Penalties
: Commissions rarely penalize officials for violations, with penalties imposed in
only 5% of cases
where applicable. This promotes a culture of impunity and discourages proper adherence to the RTI Act.
Regressive Amendments
: Amendments to the RTI Act in 2019 reduced the autonomy of information commissions by giving the central government control over tenure, salaries, and entitlements of commissioners. The 2023 Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act further restricted the disclosure of personal information under the RTI Act.
Threats and Attacks on RTI Activists
: There have been nearly
100 killings
and thousands of cases of assault, intimidation, and legal harassment against individuals using the RTI Act.
How the Erosion of RTI Undermines Democratic Principles:
Weakening of Accountability and Transparency
: The RTI Act empowers citizens to seek information and hold the government accountable. Erosion of this right leads to reduced government transparency, weakening the democratic process of checks and balances.
Increased Impunity and Abuse of Power
: The failure to impose penalties and enforce accountability fosters a culture where officials can evade scrutiny without facing consequences, allowing for corruption and abuse of power to thrive.
Diminished Public Participation in Governance
: The RTI Act plays a crucial role in empowering citizens to participate in governance by providing access to information. Restrictions on this access limit citizens’ ability to make informed decisions and engage with government policies effectively.
Chilling Effect on Whistleblowers and Activists
: Threats and violence against RTI users deter citizens from using the law to expose wrongdoing, leading to a decrease in transparency and whistleblowing.
Measures to Strengthen the RTI Framework in India: (Way forward)
Fill Vacancies and Increase Capacity
: Appoint information commissioners promptly to reduce backlogs and ensure commissions function efficiently. Strengthen the infrastructure and manpower of commissions to handle increasing workloads.
Restore Autonomy and Accountability
: Reverse regressive amendments and ensure that information commissions operate independently. Implement stricter measures for imposing penalties on officials who violate RTI norms.
Strengthen Legal Protections for RTI Users
: Operationalize the Whistleblowers Protection Act, 2014, to protect those who face retaliation for using the RTI Act. Provide security and legal assistance to activists and whistleblowers.
Promote Digital Solutions
: Enhance the use of digital platforms to file RTI applications and appeals, and improve the efficiency of the information disclosure process. This can help reduce delays and improve transparency.
Public Awareness and Training Programs
: Conduct regular public awareness campaigns to educate citizens about their rights under the RTI Act. Provide training to information officers to improve their understanding of the law and ensure timely and accurate responses.
Mains PYQ:
Recent amendments to the Right to Information Act will have a profound impact on the autonomy and independence of the Information Commission”. Discuss.
(UPSC IAS/2020)
**********What is the UNIFIL?
International Relations
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
UNIFIL, UN Peacekeeping Mission
Why in the News?
India has expressed concerns
about the safety of UN peacekeepers stationed in south Lebanon, after they came
under fire from Israeli forces
.
Among the peacekeepers are
600 Indian soldiers
, who are part of the UN peacekeeping mission and are stationed
along the 120-km Blue Line
on the Israel-Lebanon border.
What is UNIFIL (United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon)?
Details
Established
March 1978, following
Israel’s invasion
of Lebanon
UN Resolutions
Established under
UNSC Resolutions 425 and 426
Primary Objectives
Confirm Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon
Restore international peace and security
Assist the Government of Lebanon in regaining control over southern Lebanon
Area of Operation
Southern Lebanon, near the border with Israel (Blue Line)
Personnel
Over
10,000 peacekeepers
50 countries
(both civilian and military personnel)
Prevent hostilities and maintain peace along the
121-km Blue Line
Ensure that no weapons or fighters are present in the region
Report violations to the UN Security Council
Rules of Engagement
Peacekeepers are
armed
but are only allowed to use force when their safety or civilian safety is at risk
Headquarters
Naqoura
, southern Lebanon
Peacekeeper Status
Not soldiers but
impartial peacekeepers
, present with the consent of the host country, Lebanon
Significance of UNIFIL
Conflict Prevention:
UNIFIL monitors the Blue Line and prevents escalations between Israel and Lebanon.
Civilian Protection:
It safeguards civilians and supports humanitarian aid efforts in conflict zones.
Support for Lebanon:
UNIFIL helps the Lebanese government extend control in the south alongside the Lebanese Armed Forces.
PYQ:
[2015]
Discuss the impediments India is facing in its pursuit of a permanent seat in UN Security Council.
**********In news: Wular Lake
Enviro & Biodiversity
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
The harvest of water chestnuts, locally known as
goer
has begun around “
Wular Lake”
in Kashmir.
About Wular Lake:
Details
Location
Bandipore district, Jammu and Kashmir
Size
Largest freshwater lake in India, second-largest in Asia
Area
Covers 200 sq. km, with a length of 24 km and breadth of 10 km
Source
Fed by the
Jhelum River;
Streams
Madhumati
Arin
Formation
Formed due to tectonic activity; possibly a remnant of the ancient
Satisar Lake
Island formation
Features a small island called
Zaina Lank
, constructed by
King Zainul-Abidin
Ecological Significance
Ramsar Wetland Site (since 1990), supports wintering, staging, and breeding of many bird species
Wildlife
Important for bird species like
black-eared kite
Himalayan monal
Himalayan golden eagle
Fish Habitat
Accounts for 60% of the fish production in Jammu and Kashmir
Wetland status
Designated as a Wetland of International Importance in
under the
Ramsar Convention
Tulbul Project
Located at the mouth of Wular Lake, aims to regulate the flow of water from the lake into the Jhelum River to enhance navigation and ensure year-round water availability.
Controversial due to objections raised by Pakistan under the
Indus Waters Treaty
. Currently, the project remains stalled.
PYQ:
[2018]
Which one of the following is an artificial lake?
(a) Kodaikanal (Tamil Nadu)
(b) Kolleru (Andhra Pradesh)
(c) Nainital (Uttarakhand)
(d) Renuka (Himachal Pradesh)
**********What is Wayanad’s new X-band Radar?
Science Tech
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Doppler, X-Band Radar, NISAR
Why in the News?
After the floods and
landslides in Wayanad
in July 2024, the
Union Ministry of Earth Sciences
approved the installation of an “
X-band radar”
in the district.
What is an X-Band Radar?
An
is a type of radar that operates in the
8-12 GHz frequency range
of the electromagnetic spectrum, with wavelengths of
2-4 cm
This radar is particularly useful for detecting smaller particles like
raindrops, fog
, and other fine materials due to its
shorter wavelengths
, which allow for
higher resolution images
Key Features of X-Band Radar:
High Resolution:
The shorter wavelength provides more detailed images, making it ideal for tracking weather phenomena, including precipitation and particle movements.
Limited Range:
They have a relatively shorter range compared to other types like S-band radars because higher frequency signals get attenuated (weakened) faster as they travel through the atmosphere.
Applications:
In weather forecasting, X-band radars are used for short-range weather monitoring, such as predicting rainfall intensity and landslides. They are also used in air traffic control and military applications.
What is a Doppler Radar?
A Doppler radar is a type of radar used primarily in
meteorology
to measure the
velocity
of weather formations, such as clouds and storms.
It works on the principle of the
Doppler effect
, which refers to the change in frequency of waves as their source moves relative to the observer.
It’s applications:
Velocity Measurement:
By measuring these changes in frequency, Doppler radar can determine how fast the object (e.g., rain cloud) is moving and in which direction.
Weather Monitoring:
Doppler radar helps in tracking rainfall intensity, detecting wind patterns, and predicting the formation of storms or tornadoes.
India’s Radar Network
India Meteorological Department (IMD)
began using radars in weather applications in the
1950s
The first
indigenously designed X-band storm detection radar
was installed in
1970
in New Delhi.
1996
, the IMD replaced 10 outdated X-band radars with
digital X-band radars
India’s radar network includes both
wind-finding and storm-detecting X-band radars
. The country also uses
S-band radars (2-4 GHz)
for long-range detection. The first
S-band cyclone detection radar
Visakhapatnam in 1970
Recent Developments:
September 2024
, the Ministry of Earth Sciences announced that India would install
56 additional Doppler radars
over the next few years.
On
September 11, 2024
, the Union Cabinet approved the
₹2,000-crore ‘
Mission Mausam’
, which aims to upgrade meteorological infrastructure, including the installation of
up to 60 radars by 2026
Wayanad radar initiative
also includes the installation of a
C-band radar (4-8 GHz)
Mangaluru
, with an observational range of
250 km
About the NISAR
, short for
NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar
, is a joint satellite mission being developed by
NISAR will use
radar imaging
to create a
high-resolution map
of the earth’s landmasses, tracking changes in natural processes.
Its payload consists of an
L-band radar (1.25 GHz, 24 cm)
built by NASA and an
S-band radar (3.2 GHz, 9.3 cm)
built by ISRO.
NISAR is expected to launch in
2025
aboard an
ISRO GSLV Mk II rocket
, with a total cost of
$1.5 billion
, primarily funded by NASA.
PYQ:
[2016]
Discuss India’s achievements in the field of Space Science and Technology. How the application of this technology has helped India in its socio-economic development?
**********China’s ‘Anaconda Strategy’
Security Issues
Note4Students
From UPSC perspective, the following things are important :
Prelims level:
Why in the News?
Taiwanese authorities recently stated that the
People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
is using an
‘anaconda strategy’
to put pressure on Taiwan.
China’s Military Maneuvers around Taiwan
China has been steadily increasing its military activities around Taiwan, both by air and sea:
Air incursions into the Taiwan Strait
have increased significantly, from 36 incursions in January to 193 in September.
Chinese ships operating around Taiwan
has also risen, from 142 in early 2024 to 282 by August.
These maneuvers seem designed to wear down Taiwan’s navy and air force, creating constant pressure.
What is the Anaconda Strategy?
The ‘anaconda strategy’ involves a combination of military tactics, psychological pressure, and cyber warfare.
The goal is to weaken Taiwan’s defenses and force the island into submission without the need for a full-scale invasion.
China’s approach is one of relentless pressure.
It is trying to tire out Taiwan and force it into making mistakes, which could then be used as a pretext to launch a blockade.
Its ultimate goal appears to be to make Taiwan vulnerable without resorting to direct military conflict, keeping Taiwan’s forces on the defensive.
Other Unconventional Strategies used by China:
Wolf Warrior Diplomacy
: A confrontational and assertive style of diplomacy used by Chinese officials, characterized by aggressive rhetoric and nationalistic stances, often aimed at defending China’s interests and countering foreign criticism.
Gray-Zone Tactics
: A set of covert strategies that fall between war and peace, including actions like cyberattacks, propaganda, and incremental territorial gains, aimed at advancing a nation’s goals without triggering a full-scale military conflict.
Salami Slicing:
A strategy where small, incremental actions are taken over time to achieve a larger goal without triggering a strong reaction. It is often used to gain control or advantage bit by bit, avoiding immediate confrontation.
PYQ:
[2021]
The US is facing an existential threat in the form of a China that is much more challenging than the erstwhile Soviet Union. Explain.
[2017]
“China is using its economic relations and positive trade surplus as tools to develop potential military power status in Asia”. In the light of this statement, discuss its impact on India as her neighbour.
**********