
**********
7th Rashtriya Poshan Maah 2024
Source: PIB
Why in News?
Recently, the
Ministry of Women and Child Development
launched the
Dhar district
of Madhya Pradesh on 1
September 2024.
Also, the Ministry of Women and Child Development received the
National Award for e-Governance 2024
(Gold)
for the
Poshan Tracker initiative
What is Rashtriya Poshan Maah?
About Rashtriya Poshan Maah:
It is an
annual campaign
aimed at addressing
malnutrition
and promoting
better nutrition
and health practices.
It is celebrated in the month of
every year under
Poshan Abhiyan
(PM’s Overarching Scheme for Holistic Nourishment).
Key Focus Areas:
It focuses on enhancing awareness about
nutrition, improving dietary practices, and combating malnutrition
among vulnerable groups, including
children, adolescents, pregnant women, and lactating mothers.
It is in line with the national vision of a
‘Suposhit Bharat.’
Activities:
Various activities are conducted, such as
plantation drives
, distribution of nutritional supplements, community outreach programs, exhibitions, and educational sessions.
E.g.,
began with a nationwide plantation drive titled
“Ek Ped Maa Ke Naam”.
Key Themes of Rashtriya Poshan Maah 2024:
Anaemia
Growth Monitoring, Complementary Feeding,
Poshan Bhi Padhai Bhi,
Technology for Better Governance, and
What is POSHAN Abhiyaan?
About:
It was launched in
March 2018
to address malnutrition by focusing on the
nutritional needs
of adolescent girls, pregnant women, lactating mothers, and children up to 6 years old.
It is implemented by the Ministry of Women and Child Development.
Objectives:
It targets to reduce
stunting,
under-nutrition
, anaemia
(among young children, women and adolescent girls) and reduce
low birth weight
2%, 2%, 3% and 2% per annum
respectively.
Targeting children aged
0-6 years
to reduce stunting and underweight prevalence
Reducing Anaemia prevalence among young children (6-59 months) and among women and adolescent girls aged 15-49 years.
Components of POSHAN Abhiyaan:
Village Health Sanitation Nutrition Day (VHSND):
It promotes coordination through target-setting, sector meetings, and
decentralised planning
ICDS-CAS (Common Application Software):
It employs software and growth monitoring tools to
track nutritional status.
What is Poshan Tracker?
mobile app
that tracks and
monitors the health and nutrition
of children and pregnant women in India.
It serves as an essential tool for
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs)
that reflects the progress and impact of their interventions and enables real-time monitoring.
It is an interactive tool that measures a child's growth using
World Health Organization (WHO)
standards
and provides suggestions for corrective action based on the inputs.
AWWs can register
6 types of beneficiaries:
Pregnant Women, Lactating Mothers, Children between 0-6 months, Children between 6 months to 3 years, Children between 3-6 years and Adolescent Girls aged 14-18 years (specifically for Aspirational Districts).
