
**********
Centralised Hiring in Eklavya Model Residential Schools
Source:TH
Why in News?
The centralisation of recruitment for the
Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS)
across the country (introduced in 2023 Budget), which introduced
Hindi competency as a mandatory requirement,
has resulted in a request for transfers.
Although central officials emphasise that applicants were required to be willing to accept postings anywhere in the country, the larger concern is the
potential impact on tribal students being taught by teachers who are unfamiliar with the local language and culture.
What are Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS)?
EMRS is a scheme for making
model residential schools for Indian tribals (ST- Scheduled Tribes) across India.
It
started in
the year
1997-98.
Its
nodal ministry
Ministry of Tribal Affairs.
These schools are being developed to
provide quality education to tribal students
, focusing on academic as well as overall development.
The EMR Schools generally follow the
CBSE curriculum.
The scheme aims to
build schools similar to Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas and Kendriya Vidyalayas,
with a focus on
state-of-the-art facilities for preserving local art and culture,
as well as providing training in sports and skill development. The EMRS scheme was revamped in FY 2018-19.
During the
2023 Budget session of Parliament,
the Finance Minister announced that the responsibility for recruiting staff in EMRS would be transferred to the
National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS)
NESTS has now been tasked with
staffing 38,000 positions in over 400 Eklavya schools nationwide.
The centralization of recruitment aimed to
address the severe teacher shortage
in the EMRS system and to
standardize recruitment rules across states.
What is the Recent Issue Related to Recruitment to EMRS?
Requirement of Hindi Competency:
The recent
centralization of recruitment introduced Hindi competency
mandatory requirement.
This has resulted in a large number of
staff recruited from Hindi-speaking states being posted to EMRS in southern states,
where the language, food, and culture are unfamiliar to them.
The government has stated that the
requirement of basic Hindi language competency is not unusual,
as it is
mandatory for
recruitment as well.
Impact on Tribal Students:
Most tribal students in Eklavya schools would benefit from teachers who understand their local cultural contexts, as the
communities have very specific contexts
under which
learning can be made conducive.
Government officials have
stated that teacher recruits are expected to learn the local language within two years
, but there have been
apprehensions among the recruited teachers
a new, completely
different language.
The posting of
non-local teachers can negatively impact the learning of tribal students,
as they may not be able to adjust to teachers who are not aware of their cultural context.
Way Forward
Localised Recruitment:
recruitment of teachers from local communities should be prioritised
to ensure
they are familiar with the cultural and linguistic contexts of the students.
Both
local and non-local teachers should be recruited
to ensure a
diversity of teaching methods
while respecting local traditions.
Flexible Language Requirements:
mandatory Hindi competency requirement should be reevaluated
to allow for flexibility in non- Hindi speaking regions.
Language support programs
should be actively encouraged for teachers to learn the local languages of the regions they are posted to.
Cultural Sensitivity Training:
Comprehensive cultural sensitivity training
should be provided to all teachers, especially those from non-local areas, to help them
understand and integrate into the community they are serving.
Develop
ongoing professional development programs
focusing on local cultural contexts and language skills.
Policy Review:
Regular
reviews of the recruitment policy should be conducted
to assess its impact on both teachers and students, making necessary adjustments to address emerging issues.
Ensure that policies are adaptable to the diverse cultural and linguistic landscapes across different states.
Drishti Mains Question:
Q. Discuss the issues related to Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS) and how to solve them?
